<!--se:split-->
<h2 class="nobreak"><small>CHAPTER I</small><br/>


Genesis</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">I suppose</span> that in the days before the catastrophe I was a
very fair representative of the better type of business man. I
had been successful in my own line, which was the application
of mass-production methods to a better pattern of motor-car
than had yet been dealt with upon a large scale; and the
Flint car had been a good speculation. I was thinking of
bringing out an economical type of gyroscopic two-wheeler
just at the time we were overwhelmed. Organisation was my
strong point; and much of my commercial success was due
to a new system of control which I had introduced into my
factories. I mention this point in passing, because it was
this capacity of mine which first brought me to the notice of
Nordenholt.</p>
<p>Although at the time of which I speak I had become more
a director than a designer, I was originally by profession a
mechanical engineer; and in my student days I had had a
scientific training, some remnants of which still fluttered in
tatters in odd corners of my mind. I could check the newspaper
accounts of new discoveries in chemistry and physics
well enough to know when the reporters blundered grossly;
geology I remembered vaguely, though I could barely have
distinguished augite from muscovite under a microscope:
but the biological group of subjects had never come within
my ken. The medical side of science was a closed book as
far as I was concerned.</p>
<p>Yet, like many educated men of that time, I took a certain
interest in scientific affairs. I read the accounts of the British
Association in the newspapers year by year; I bought a copy
of <i>Nature</i> now and again when a new line of research caught
my attention; and occasionally I glanced through some of
these popular <i>réchauffés</i> of various scientific topics by means
of which people like myself were able to persuade themselves
that they were keeping in touch with the advance of
knowledge.</p>
<p>It was this taste of mine which brought me into contact
with Wotherspoon; for, beyond his interest in scientific
affairs, he and I had little enough in common. It is over a
quarter of a century since I saw him last, for he must have died
in the first year of our troubles; but I can still recall him very
clearly: a short, stout man—“pudgy” is perhaps the word
which best describes him—with a drooping, untidy moustache
half-covering but not concealing the slackness of his mouth;
fair hair, generally brushed in a lank mass to one side of his
forehead; and watery eyes which had a look in them as of
one crushed beneath a weight of knowledge and responsibility.</p>
<p>As a matter of fact, I doubt if his knowledge was
sufficiently profound or extensive to crush any ordinary
person; and as he had a private income and no dependants, I
could not understand what responsibilities weighed upon him.
He certainly held no official post in the scientific world which
might have burdened him; for despite numerous applications
on his part, none of the Universities had seen fit to utilise
his services in even the meanest capacity.</p>
<p>To be quite frank, he was a dabbler. He originated
nothing, discovered nothing, improved nothing; and yet, by
some means, he had succeeded in imposing himself upon the
public mind. He delivered courses of popular lectures on the
work of real investigators; and I believe that these lectures
were well attended. He wrote numerous books dealing with
the researches of other men; and the publication of volume
after volume kept him in the public eye. Whenever an important
discovery was made by some real scientific expert,
Wotherspoon would sit down and compile newspaper articles
on the subject with great facility; and by these methods he
achieved, among inexperienced readers, the reputation of a
sort of arbiter in the scientific field. “As Mr. Wotherspoon
says in the article which we publish elsewhere” was a phrase
which appeared from time to time in the leader columns of
the more sensational Press.</p>
<p>Naturally, he was disliked by the men who actually did the
scientific work of the world and who had little time to spare
for cultivating notoriety. He was a member of a large
number of those societies to which admission can be gained
by payment of an entrance fee and subscription; and on the
bills of his lectures and the title-pages of his books his name
was followed by a string of letters which the uninitiated
assumed to imply great scientific ability. His application for
admission to the Royal Society had, however, been unsuccessful—a
failure which he frequently and publicly attributed to
jealousy.</p>
<p>It appears strange that such a man as this should have
been selected by Fate as the agent of disaster; and it seems
characteristic of him that, when the key of the problem was
lying beside him, his energy was entirely engrossed in writing
newspaper paragraphs on another matter. His mind
worked exclusively through the medium of print and paper;
so that even the most striking natural phenomenon escaped
his observation.</p>
<p>At that time he lived in one of the houses of Cumberland
Terrace, overlooking Regent’s Park. I cannot recall the
number; and the place has long ago disappeared; but I
remember that it was near St. Katherine’s College and it
overlooked the grounds of St. Katherine’s House. Wotherspoon
carried his scientific aura even into the arrangement of
his residence; for what was normally the drawing-room of
the house had been turned into a kind of laboratory-reception-room;
so that casual visitors might be impressed by his ardour
in the pursuit of knowledge. When anyone called upon
him, he was always discovered in this room, fingering
apparatus, pouring liquids from one tube into another, producing
precipitates or doing something else which would strike
the unwary as being part of a recondite process. I had a
feeling, when I came upon him in the midst of these
manœuvres, that he had sprung up from his chair at the
sound of the door bell and had plunged hastily into his
operations. I know enough to distinguish real work from
make-believe; and Wotherspoon never gave me the impression
that he was engaged in anything better than window-dressing.
At any rate, nothing ever was made public with
regard to the results of these multitudinous experiments; and
when, occasionally, I asked him if he proposed to bring out a
paper, he merely launched into a diatribe against the jealousy
of scientific men.</p>
<p>It was about this time that Henley-Davenport was making
his earlier discoveries in the field of induced radioactivity.
The results were too technical for the unscientific man to
appreciate; but I had become interested, not so much in
details as in possibilities; and I determined to go across the
Park and pay a visit to Wotherspoon one evening. I knew
that, as far as published information went, he would be in
possession of the latest news; and it was easier to get it from
him than to read it myself.</p>
<p>It was warm weather then. I decided to use my car instead
of walking through the Park. I had a slight headache, and
I thought that possibly a short spin later, in the cool of the
evening, might take it away. As I drove, I noticed how
thunder-clouds were banking up on the horizon, and I congratulated
myself that even if they broke I should have the
shelter of the car and be saved a walk home through the rain.</p>
<p>When I reached Cumberland Terrace, I was, as I
expected, shown up into Wotherspoon’s sanctum. I found
him, as usual, deeply engrossed in work: he had his eye to
the tube of a large microscope, down which he was staring
intently. I noticed a slight change in the equipment of the
room. There seemed to be fewer retorts, flasks and test-tube
racks than there usually were; and two large tables at
the windows were littered with flat glass dishes containing
thin slabs of pinkish material which seemed to be gelatine.
Things like incubators took up a good deal of the remaining
space. But I doubt if it is worth while describing what I
saw: I know very little of such things; and I question
whether his apparatus would have passed muster with an
expert in any case.</p>
<p>After a certain amount of fumbling with the microscope,
which seemed largely a formal matter leading to nothing, he
rose from his seat and greeted me with his customary pre-occupied
air. For a time we smoked and talked of Henley-Davenport’s
work; but after he had answered my questions
it became evident that he had no further interest in the
subject; and I was not surprised when, after a pause, he
broke entirely new ground in his next remark.</p>
<p>“Do you know, Flint,” he said, “I am losing interest in
all these investigations of the atomic structure. It seems to
me that while unimaginative people like Henley-Davenport
are groping into the depths of the material Universe, the
real thing is passing them by. After all, what is mere
matter in comparison with the problems of life? I have
given up atoms and I am going to begin work upon living
organisms.”</p>
<p>That was so characteristic of Wotherspoon. He was
always “losing interest in” something and “going to begin
work” upon something else. I nodded without saying
anything. After all, it seemed of very little importance
what he “worked” at.</p>
<p>“I wonder if you ever reflect, Flint,” he continued, “if
you ever ponder over our position in this Universe? Here
we stand, like Dante, ‘midway in this our mortal life’; at
the half-way house between the cradle and the grave in time.
And in space, too, we represent the middle term between
the endless stretches of the Macrocosm and the bottomless
deeps of the Microcosm. Look up at the night-sky and
your eyes will tingle with the rays from long-dead stars,
suns that were blotted out ages ago though the light they
sent out before they died still thrills across the ether on its
journey to our Earth. Take your microscope, and you
find a new world before you; increase the magnification
and another, tinier cosmos sweeps into your ken. And so,
with ever-growing lens-power, we can peer either upward into
stellar space or downward into the regions of the infinitesimal,
while between these deeps we ourselves stand for a
time on our precarious bridge of Earth.”</p>
<p>I began to suspect that he was trying over some phrases
for a coming lecture; but it was early yet and I could not
decently make an excuse for leaving him. I took a fresh
cigar and let him go on without interruption.</p>
<p>“It always seems strange to me how little the man in the
street knows of the things around him. The microscopic
world has no existence as far as his mind is concerned. A
grain of dust is too small for him to notice; it must blow
into his eye before he appreciates that it has perceptible size
at all. And yet, all about him and within him there lives
this wonderful race of beings, passing to and fro in his veins
as we do in the streets and avenues of a great city; coming
to birth, going about their concerns, falling ill and dying,
just as men do in London at this hour. Think of the
battles, the victories, and the defeats which take place
minute by minute in the tiniest drop of our blood; and the
issue of the war may be the life or death of one of us.
They talk of the struggle for existence; but the real
struggle for existence is going on within us and not in the
outer world. Phagocyte against bacterium—that is where
the fitness of an organism comes to its ultimate test. A
slight hitch in the reinforcements, a minute’s delay in
bringing numbers to bear, and the keystone is out of the
edifice; nothing is left but a ruin.</p>
<p>“It always reminds me of those frontier skirmishes—a
mere handful of troops engaged on either side—upon the
issue of which the fate of an empire may depend. Get
a new set of enemies, some novel type of bacteria with
fresh tactics which the phagocytes cannot cope with—and
down comes a human being. It strikes wonder into me,
that, you know. A human body is so colossal in comparison
with these bacteria that they can have no idea even of our
existence; and yet they can destroy the whole machinery
upon which our life depends. It’s almost as if a few shots
fired in Africa could crumble the whole Earth into an
impalpable dust.</p>
<p>“And it is not only within us that these struggles are
going on. When you came in, I was just studying some
specimens of organisms which are equally vital to us. Come
over here to the microscope, Flint, and have a look at them
yourself.”</p>
<p>When I had got the focus adjusted to suit my eyes, I
must confess that I was astonished by what I saw. Somehow,
in the course of my reading, I had picked up the idea
that bacteria were rod-like creatures which floated inertly in
liquids at the mercy of the currents; but at the first glance
I realised how much below the reality my conception had
been. In the field of the instrument I saw a score of
objects, rod-like in their main structure, it is true, but so
mantled with the fringes of their fine, thread-like cilia that
their baculite character was almost concealed. Nor were
they the inert things which I had supposed them to be;
for, as I watched them, now one and again another would
dart with prodigious swiftness from point to point in the
circle of illumination. I had rarely seen such relative
activity in any creature. The speed of their movements
was so great that my eye could not follow them in their
tracks. They appeared to be at rest one instant and then
to vanish, reappearing as suddenly in some fresh spot. I
watched them, fascinated, for some minutes, trying to trace
the vibrations of the cilia which projected them from place
to place at such enormous speeds; but either my eye was
untrained or the movements of the thread-like fringes were
too rapid to be seen. It was certainly an illuminating
glimpse into the life of the under-world.</p>
<p>When I had risen from the microscope table, Wotherspoon
took me over to one of the benches before the window
and showed me the glass vessels containing the pinkish
gelatine. These slabs, he told me, were cultures of bacteria.
One placed a few organisms on the gelatine and there they
grew and multiplied enormously.</p>
<p>“These specimens here,” said Wotherspoon, “are not the
same variety as the ones on the microscope slide. They
have nothing whatever to do with disease; and yet, as I
told you, they have an influence upon animal life. I
suppose you never heard of nitrifying and denitrifying
bacteria?”</p>
<p>I admitted that the names were unfamiliar to me.</p>
<p>“Just so. Few people seem to take any interest in
these vital problems. Now you do know that internally we
swarm with all sorts of germs, noxious in some cases, beneficent
in others; but I suppose it never struck you that our
bodies form only a trifling part of the material world; and
that outside these living islets there is space for all sorts
of microscopic flora and fauna to grow and multiply? And
need these creatures be absolutely isolated from the interests
of animals? Not at all.</p>
<p>“Now what is the essential thing, apart from air and
water, which we derive from the outside world? Food,
isn’t it? Did it ever occur to you to inquire where your
food comes from, ultimately?”</p>
<p>“Well, of course,” I said, “it comes from all over the
world. I don’t know whether the wheat I eat in my bread
comes from Canada or the States or Argentina, or was
home-grown. It doesn’t seem to me a matter of importance,
anyway.”</p>
<p>“That isn’t what I mean at all,” Wotherspoon interrupted,
“I want you to look at it in another way. I suppose
you had your usual style of dinner to-day. Just think of
the items: soup, fish, meat, bread, and so on. Your soup
was made from bones and vegetables; your fish course was
originally an animal; so was your joint; your sweet was
probably purely vegetable; and your dessert certainly was a
plant product. Now don’t you see what I mean?”</p>
<p>“No, I confess I don’t.”</p>
<p>“Haven’t I just shown you that everything you ate
comes from either the animal or vegetable kingdom? You
don’t bite bits out of the crockery, like the Mad Hatter.
Everything you use to keep your physical machine alive
is something which has already had life in it? Isn’t that
so? You never think of having a meal of pure chemicals,
do you?”</p>
<p>“It never occurred to me; and I doubt it I shall begin
now. It doesn’t sound very appetising.”</p>
<p>“It would be worse than that; but follow my argument
further. Take the case of your joint. Presumably that
came from an ox or a sheep. Where did the animal,
whatever it was, get <i>its</i> food? From the vegetable kingdom,
in the form of grass. Isn’t it clear that everything
you yourself eat comes, either directly or indirectly, from
the plants? And aren’t all animals on the same footing
as yourself—they depend ultimately on the vegetables for
their sustenance, don’t they? A fox may live on poultry;
but the chickens he kills have grown fat by eating grain;
and so you come back to the plants again. If you like
to look on it in that way, we are all parasites on the plants;
we cannot live without them. Our digestive machinery
is so specialised that it will assimilate only a certain type
of material—protoplasm—and unless it is supplied with that
material, we starve. We can convert the protoplasm of
other animals or of plants to our own use; but we cannot
manufacture protoplasm from its elements. We have to
get it ready-made from the vegetables, either directly or
indirectly.</p>
<p>“Now the foundation-stone of protoplasm is the element
nitrogen. The plants draw on the store of nitrogenous
compounds in the soil in order to build up their tissues; and
then we eat the plants and thus transfer this material to our
own organisms. What happens next? Do we return the
nitrogen to the soil? Not we. We throw it into the sea in
the form of sewage. So you see the net outcome of the process
is that we are gradually using up the stores of nitrogen compounds
in the soil, with the result that the plants have less
and less nitrogen to live on.”</p>
<p>“Well, but surely four-fifths of the atmosphere is nitrogen?
That seems to me a big enough reserve to be
drawn on.”</p>
<p>“So it would be, if the plants could tap it directly; but
they can’t do that except in the case of some exceptional
ones. Most plants simply cannot utilise nitrogen until it
has been combined with some other element. They can’t
touch it in the uncombined state, as it is in the atmosphere;
so that as far as the nitrogen in the air goes, it is useless to
plants. They can’t thrive on pure nitrogen, any more than
you can feed yourself on a mixture of charcoal, hydrogen,
oxygen and nitrogen; though these elements are all that you
need in the way of diet to keep life going.</p>
<p>“No, Flint, we are actually depleting the soil of these
nitrogen compounds at a very rapid rate indeed. Why,
even in the first decade of the twentieth century South
America was exporting no less than 15,000,000 tons of nitrogen
compounds which she dug out of the natural deposits in
the nitre beds of Chili and Peru; and all that vast quantity
was being used as artificial manure to replace the nitrogenous
loss in the soil of the agricultural parts of the world. The
loss is so great that it even pays to run chemical processes
for making nitrogenous materials from the nitrogen of the
air—the fixation of nitrogen, they call it.</p>
<p>“Well, that is surely enough to show you how much
hangs upon this nitrogen question. If we go on as we are
doing, there will eventually be a nitrogen famine; the soil
will cease to yield crops; and we shall go short of food.
It’s no vision I am giving you; the thing has already
happened in a modified form in America. There they used
up the soil by continual drafts on it, wheat crops year after
year in the same places. The result was that the land
ceased to be productive; and we had the rush of American
farmers into Canada in the early days of the century to
utilise the virgin soil across the border instead of their own
exhausted fields.”</p>
<p>“I suppose you know all about it,” I said, “but where do
these come in?”</p>
<p>I pointed to the pinkish disks of the cultures.</p>
<p>“These are what are called denitrifying bacteria.
Although the plants can’t act upon pure nitrogen and convert
it into compounds which they can feed upon, some
bacteria have the knack. The nitrifying bacteria can link
up nitrogen with other elements so as to produce nitrogenous
material which the plants can then utilise. So that if we grow
these nitrifying bacteria in the soil, we help the plants to get
more food. The denitrifying bacteria, on the other hand—these
ones here—act in just the opposite way. Wherever
they find nitrogenous compounds, they break them down
and liberate the nitrogen from them, so that it goes back into
the air and is lost to us again.</p>
<p>“So you see that outside our bodies we have bacteria
working for or against us. The nitrifying bacteria are
helping to pile up further supplies of nitrogen compounds
upon which the plants can draw and whereon, indirectly, we
ourselves can be supported. The denitrifying bacteria, on
the other hand, are continually nibbling at the basic store of
our food; decomposing the nitrogen compounds and freeing
the nitrogen from them in the form of the pure gas which
is useless to us from the point of view of food.”</p>
<p>“You mean that a large increase in the numbers of the
one set would put us in clover, whereas multiplication of the
other lot would mean a shortness of supplies?”</p>
<p>“Exactly. And we have no idea of the forces which
govern the reproduction of these creatures. It’s quite within
the bounds of possibility that some slight change in the external
conditions might reinforce one set and decimate the
other; and such a change would have almost unpredictable
influences on our food problem.”</p>
<p>At this moment the thunder-clouds, which had grown
heavier as time passed, evidently reached their full tension.
A tremendous flash shot across the sky; and on its heel, so
close as to be almost simultaneous, there came a shattering
peal of thunder. We looked out; but I had been so dazzled
by the brilliance of the flash that I could see little. The air
was very still; no rain had yet fallen; and my skin tingled
with the electrical tension of the atmosphere. Wotherspoon
felt it also, he told me. It was evident that we were in the
vicinity of some very powerful disturbance.</p>
<p>“Awfully hot to-night, isn’t it?” I said. “Suppose we
have some more air? It’s stifling in here.”</p>
<p>Wotherspoon pushed the broad leaves of the French
windows apart; but no breeze came to cool us; though in
the silence after the thunder-clap I heard the rustle of leaves
from the trees below us. We stood, one at either end of
the bench with the cultures on it, trying to draw cooler air
into our lungs; and all the while I felt as though a multitude
of tiny electric sparks were running to and fro upon the
surface of my body.</p>
<p>Suddenly, over St. Katherine’s House, a sphere of light
appeared in the air. It was not like lightning, brilliantly
though it shone. It seemed to hover for a few seconds
above the roof, almost motionless. Then it began slowly to
advance in a wavering flight, approaching us and sinking by
degrees in the sky as it came. To me, it appeared to be
about a foot in diameter; but Wotherspoon afterwards estimated
it at rather less. In any case, it was of no great
size; and its rate of approach was not more than five miles
an hour.</p>
<p>For some seconds I watched it coming. It had a peculiar
vacillating motion, rather like that which one sees in the
flight of certain kinds of summer flies. Now it would hover
almost motionless, then suddenly it would dart forward for
twenty yards or so, only to resume its oscillation about a
fixed point.</p>
<p>But to tell the truth, I watched it in such a state of
fascination that I doubt if any coherent thoughts passed
through my mind; so that my impressions may have been
inaccurate. All that I remember clearly is a state of extreme
tension. I never feel quite comfortable during a
thunder-storm; and the novelty of the phenomenon increased
this discomfort, for I did not know what turn it might take
next.</p>
<p>Slowly the luminous sphere crossed the edge of the Park,
dipping suddenly as though the iron railings had attracted
it; and now it was almost opposite our window. For a
moment its impetus seemed to carry it onwards, slantingly
along the terrace; then, with a dart it swung from its course
and entered the window at which we stood.</p>
<p>From its behaviour at the Park rail, I am inclined to
think that it was drawn from its line of flight by the attracting
power of the metal balustrade which protected the little
balcony outside the window; and that its velocity carried it
past the iron, so that it came to rest within the room, just
over the table between us.</p>
<p>Instinctively, both Wotherspoon and I recoiled from this
flaming apparition, shrinking back as far as possible from it
on either side. Beyond this movement we seemed unable to
go, for neither of us stepped out of the window recess.
Between us, the ball of fire hung almost motionless; but
before my eyes were dazzled I saw that it was spinning
with tremendous velocity on a horizontal axis; and it
seemed to me that its substance was a multitude of tiny
sparks whirling in orbits about its centre. Its light was like
that from a spirit-lamp charged with common salt; for over
it I caught a glimpse of Wotherspoon’s flinching face, all
shadowed and green. As I watched the fire-ball, shading my
eyes with my hands, I saw that it was slowly settling, just as a
soap-bubble sinks in the air. Lower it descended and lower,
still spinning furiously on its axis. Then, after what seemed
an interminable period of suspense, it collided with the
table.</p>
<p>There came a dull explosion which jerked me from my feet
and drove me back against a chair. I saw Wotherspoon
collapse and then everything vanished in the darkness which
followed the concussion.</p>
<p>It must have been half a minute before I was able to
recover from the shock and pull myself together. When I
got to my feet again, I found Wotherspoon half-standing,
half-leaning against the door, one panel of which had been
blown out. The room was strewn with wreckage: broken
glass, scattered papers, and shattered furniture. The electric
lamps had been smashed by the force of the explosion.</p>
<p>Wotherspoon and I recovered almost simultaneously; and
on comparing notes—which was difficult at first owing to
our being temporarily deaf—we found that neither of us
had suffered any serious injury. A few slight cuts with
flying glass were apparently the worst of the damage which
we had sustained. There was a sharp tang in the air of
the room which made us cough for some time until it
cleared away; but whatever the gas may have been, it
left no permanent effects on us.</p>
<p>When we had procured lights and pulled ourselves together
sufficiently to make a fuller examination of the room, we
began to appreciate the extent of the damage and to congratulate
ourselves still more upon the escape which we had
had. The whole place was littered with fragments of
furniture. The incubators had been shattered; and their
contents, smashed into countless fragments, lay all over the
floor. But it was on the bench at the window that the full
force of the fire-ball had spent itself. There was hardly
anything recognisable in the heap of debris. The wooden
planks had been torn and broken with tremendous force.
The little balcony was filled with sticks which had been
thrown outward by the explosion; and, as we found afterwards,
a good deal of material had been projected half-way
across the road. Of the denitrifying bacteria cultures or
their cases there was hardly a trace, except a few tiny
splinters of glass.</p>
<p>I did not wait much longer with Wotherspoon; for, to
tell the truth, my nerves were badly shaken by my experiences.
I got him to come downstairs with me and
we had a stiff glass of brandy each; and then I telephoned
for a taxi to take me home. My own car was standing
at the door; but I did not trust my ability to drive it in
traffic at that moment. It seemed better to send my man
round for it after I got home.</p>
<p>I went back in the taxi, with my nerves on edge.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 class="nobreak"><small>CHAPTER II</small><br/>


The Coming of “The Blight”</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">Next</span> morning I still felt the effects of the shock; and
decided not to go to my office. I stayed indoors all day.
When the evening papers came, I found in them brief
accounts of the fire-ball; and in one case there was an
article by Wotherspoon under the heading: “Well-known
Scientist’s Strange Experience.” One or two reporters
called at my house later in the day in search of copy, but
I sent them on to Cumberland Terrace. In some of the
reports I figured as “a well-known motor manufacturer,”
whilst in others I was referred to simply as “a friend of
Mr. Wotherspoon.” I had little difficulty in surmising
the authorship of the latter group.</p>
<p>In the ordinary course of events, the fire-ball would have
been much less than a nine days’ wonder, even in spite of
Wotherspoon’s industry in compiling accounts of it and
digging out parallel cases from the correspondence columns
of old volumes of <i>Nature</i> and <i>Knowledge</i>; actually its career
as a news item was made briefer still. An entirely different
phenomenon shouldered it out of the limelight almost
immediately.</p>
<p>After staying indoors all day, I felt the need of fresh
air; and resolved to walk across the Park to Cumberland
Terrace to see whether Wotherspoon had quite recovered
from the shock. I had not much doubt in my mind upon
the point; for the traces of his journalistic activity were
plain enough; and showed that he was certainly not incapacitated.
However, as I wanted a stroll and as I might
as well have an object before me, I decided to go and see
him.</p>
<p>Twilight was coming on as I crossed the suspension
bridge. Even after the thunder-storm on the previous night
there had been no rainfall; and although the temperature
had fallen until the air was almost chilly, there was as yet
no dew on the ground. I stopped on the bridge to watch
the tints of the western sky; for these London after-glow
effects always pleased me.</p>
<p>As I leaned on the rail, I heard the low drone of aerial
engines; and in a few seconds the broad wings of the
Australian Express swept between me and the sky. Even
in those days I could never see one of these vast argosies
passing overhead without a throb in my veins.</p>
<p>The great air-services had just come to their own; and
aeroplanes started from London four and five times daily for
America, Asia, Africa, and Australia. In the windows of
the air-offices the flight of these vessels could be followed
hour by hour on the huge world-maps over which moved
tiny models showing the exact positions of the various
aeroplanes on the globe. Watching the dots moving across
the surface of the charts, one could call up, with very little
imagination, the landscapes which were sweeping into the
view of travellers on board the real machines as they glided
through these far-distant spaces of the air. This one, two
days out from London, would be sighting the pagoda roofs
of Pekin as the night was coming on; that one, on the
Pacific route, had just finished filling up its tanks at Singapore
and was starting on the long course to Australia; the
passengers on this other would be watching the sun standing
high over Victoria Nyanza; while, on the Atlantic, the
Western Ocean Express and the South American Mail
were racing the daylight into a fourth continent.</p>
<p>I think it was these maps which first brought home to
me distinctly how the spaces of the world had shrunk on
the “time-scale” with the coming of the giant aeroplanes.
The pace had been growing swifter and ever swifter since
the middle of the nineteenth century. Up to that day,
there had been little advance since the time of the earlier
sailing-vessels. Then came the change from sail to steam;
and the Atlantic crossing contracted in its duration. The
great Trans-continental railways quickened transit once
more; again there was a shrinkage in the time-scale. Vladivostok
came within ten days of London; from Cairo to
the Cape was only five days. But with the coming of the
air-ways the acceleration was greater still; and we reckoned
in hours the journeys which, in the nineteenth century
days, had been calculated in weeks and even months. All
the outposts of the world were drawing nearer together.</p>
<p>It was not this shrinkage only which the air-maps suggested.
In the early twentieth century the telegraphs and
submarine cables had spread their network over the world,
linking nation to nation and coast to coast; but their
ramifications dwindled in perspective when compared with
the complex network of the air-ways which now enmeshed
the globe. London lay like a spider at the centre of the
web of communications, the like of which the world had
never seen before; and along each thread the aeroplanes
were speeding to and from all the quarters of the earth.</p>
<p>Rapid communication we had had since the days of the
extension of the telegraph; but it had been limited to the
transmission of thoughts and of news. The coming of
the aeroplanes had changed all that. These tracks on
the air-maps were not mere wires thrilling with the quiverings
of the electric current. Along them material things
were passing continually; a constant interchange of passengers
and goods was taking place hourly over the multitudinous
routes. For good or ill, humanity was becoming linked
together until it formed a single unit.</p>
<p>It is curious that all the prophetic writers of the early
twentieth century concentrated their attention almost exclusively
upon the racial and social reactions which might be
expected to follow from this knitting of the world into a
connected whole and the resultant increase of traffic between
the nations over the now contracted world-spaces. They
had seen the interminglings of races which began in the
steamship days; and they deduced that the process would
be intensified in the new era of air-transit; so that, in the
end of their dreams, they saw the possibility of a World
Federation stretching its rule over the whole globe and
bringing with it the end of wars. None of them, strangely
enough, had foreseen the real effects which this intercommunication
was to bring forth.</p>
<p>To a certain extent, their foresight had been justified.
With the coming of the air-ways, the war-spirit was temporarily
exorcised. The vast increase in the size and number
of air-craft and the terrors of an aerial war, with all its
untested possibilities, served to rein in even the most ardent
of military nations. Standing armies still persisted; but
their numbers had been diminished to a few thousands;
for under the new conditions the old huge and unwieldy
terrestrial forces could neither be fed, nor protected from
aerial attacks.</p>
<p>Thus as I leaned on the rail of the suspension bridge
and looked out over the greenery of the Park it seemed
to me a very pleasant world. Those of the younger
generation can hardly imagine how fair it was or how
inexhaustible it seemed. Thousands of square miles of
Africa and South America were still virgin soil, store-houses
of untapped resources waiting for humanity to
draw upon their abundance. There was food for all the
thousand millions of mankind; and, as the population rose,
fresh lands could be brought under cultivation for the mere
labour of clearing the soil of its surplus vegetation. It was
the Golden Age of humanity; yet few of us recognised it.
We looked either backward into the past or forward into
the future when we sought the Islands of the Blest: while
all about us lay Paradise, and the Earth blossomed like a
huge garden which was ours for the taking.</p>
<p>I left my visions with a sigh and continued my way
across the Park. The prolonged spell of heat was affecting
the vegetation. The trees were dusty; and the grass
seemed to have lost something of its brilliant green. I
remember that after I had crossed the Broad Walk I
noticed especially how moribund all the plant-life of the
Park appeared to be. There was an air of decline about
it, though no tints of autumn had yet appeared in the
leaves.</p>
<p>Wotherspoon was, as usual, in his laboratory. The glass
of the windows had been replaced; but otherwise the place
was much in its disordered condition. I suspect that he had
purposely refrained from getting it cleared up, in order to
impress reporters with the actual damage which the explosion
had done; and that when the reporters had ceased
to call he had left things as they were with the idea of
fascinating any visitors who might come.</p>
<p>He was sitting at his writing-desk, surrounded by piles
of books from which he was apparently extracting information
for the purpose of some fresh article he had in hand;
and when I came in he asked me to excuse him for a few
minutes until he had got his data completed. In order to
amuse me in the meanwhile, he dragged out his microscope
and a pile of slides which he thought might interest
me.</p>
<p>Before he went back to his work, it struck me that I
would like to see the bacteria again; and I picked up from
the floor some fragments of glass which evidently had
formed part of his cultures, since particles of the pink
gelatine adhered to them still. I asked him to fix the
microscope for me, so that I could examine these things;
and he wetted the stuff with some water and put a drop of
it under the lens, leaving me to focus it myself while he
went back to his writing-desk. He was soon deep in his
article.</p>
<p>As I gazed down at the field of the microscope, I saw
again the clumps of bacilli, some floating aimlessly in masses,
others darting here and there in the disk of illumination. I
studied them for a time without noticing anything peculiar;
but at last it struck me that the field was becoming congested
with the creatures. I looked more carefully; and
now there seemed little doubt of the fact. The numbers of
them were increasing almost visibly. I concentrated my
attention on a small group in one corner of the slide and
was able, in spite of the confusion introduced by their rapid
and erratic movements, to feel certain that they were
multiplying so fast that I could almost estimate the increase
in percentages minute by minute.</p>
<p>“Here, Wotherspoon,” I said, “come and have a look
through this. These bacteria of yours seem to be spawning
or something.”</p>
<p>“I wish you wouldn’t interrupt, there’s a good chap,” he
said in a peevish tone. “Don’t you know that writing takes
all one’s attention? I can’t do two things at once; and
this article must be finished on time if it is to be of any use
to me or anyone else. Just amuse yourself for half an hour
and then I shall be at your disposal if you want me.”</p>
<p>It was said so ungraciously that I took offence; and as
his original “few minutes” had now apparently extended
to “half an hour” I thought it best to leave him to himself.
When I said good-night to him, he seemed to regard it as
an extra interruption; so I was not sorry to go. I left him
still delving into the masses of printed material around him.</p>
<p>And that was how Wotherspoon missed the greatest
discovery that ever came his way. It was waiting for him
across the table, for I doubt if he could have failed to draw
the obvious conclusion had he actually taken the trouble
to examine the phenomenon with his own eyes. But his
interest was concentrated upon his writing; and his chance
passed him by. After Johnston published his views, Wotherspoon
made what I can only consider to be a dishonest
attempt to secure priority on the ground that he was aware
of the facts but had not had time to work out the subject
fully before Johnston rushed into print; but he secured no
support from any authoritative quarter; and even the newspapers
had by that time seen the necessity of consulting
experts, so that he was unable to place the numerous articles
which he wrote to confute Johnston.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>Three days later, Regent’s Park again figured in the
columns of the newspapers.</p>
<p>The first mention of the matter which I saw was in
an evening journal. I had been reading a short account of a
locust plague in China which was reported to have destroyed
crops upon a large scale and caused a panic emigration of the
inhabitants of the devastated district, owing to the failure of
supplies. Just below this article, my eye caught a paragraph
headed:</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Strange Blight in Regent’s Park.</span></p>
<p>It appeared that the vegetation in the Park had been
attacked by some peculiar disease, the symptoms of which
were evidently not very clear to the writer of the paragraph.
According to him, the plants were withering away; but
there seemed to be no fungus or growth on the leaves which
would account for their decrepitude. Trees and flowers
equally with the grass were attacked by the blight. While
throwing out a hint that the prolonged drought might
possibly account for the phenomenon, the reporter indicated
that the thing was rather more local than might have been
anticipated from this cause; for the worst effects of the
blight were to be found in the vegetation of the strip
between Gloucester Gate and the Outer Circle in one
direction and between the Broad Walk and the Park edge
in the other. Beyond this oblong, the damage done was
not so readily recognisable.</p>
<p>That evening, as the fine weather still held, I walked
through Regent’s Park to see for myself what truth there
was in the newspaper talk. More people than usual were
out; for in addition to the normal crowds of pedestrians, it
was evident that others had come, like myself, to examine
the blight. The Broad Walk was thronged; for the
Londoner of those days was one of the most inquisitive
creatures in existence.</p>
<p>It was evident that, considered from the “show” point of
view, the state of affairs had been a disappointment to the
people. I heard numerous comments as I walked among the
crowd; and the tone was one of disparagement. The
general feeling seemed to be that the thing was a mare’s
nest or a newspaper hoax.</p>
<p>“Blight, they calls it?” said one stout old woman as I
passed; “I’d like to blight the young feller what wrote all
that in the papers about it, I would! Me putting on my
best things and walking ever so far on a hot night to see
nothing better than a lot of dried grass. I thought it would
be fair seething with grasshoppers,” and she shook her head
till the trimmings of her antique hat trembled with her
vehemence. Evidently she had mixed up the Chinese
locusts and the Regent’s Park affair in her mind.</p>
<p>Other people shared her discontent; and the younger
section of the crowd had begun to seek for amusement by
means of spasmodic outbursts of horse-play.</p>
<p>What I saw of the phenomenon was certainly not very
thrilling. All the grass to the east of the Broad Walk had
the appearance of being sun-blasted. The green tint had
gone from it and it had turned straw-colour. On the west
side of the Walk there were patches of stricken vegetation
scattered here and there as far as one could see, but the
effect was not so marked towards the Inner Circle.</p>
<p>I stooped down and rooted up a tuft of withered grass in
order to examine it more closely; and to my surprise it
came away readily in my hand, leaving the roots almost
clear of earth. I could see nothing peculiar about the grass
itself; even the most careful inspection failed to reveal any
adherent fungus or growth of any description which might
account for the phenomenon. I began to think that, after
all, the whole thing was due to the heat of the past few
weeks, and that the local appearance of the effects was a
mere chance.</p>
<p>Next day, however, this idea was put out of court by the
news that the blight had spread to the other London parks.
Hyde Park suffered severely in the corner between the
Marble Arch and the Serpentine; the gardens of Buckingham
Palace were also affected; and the grass in Battersea
Park showed sporadic outbreaks of the disease also. Victoria
Park, however, seemed to have escaped almost intact;
though some traces could be detected.</p>
<p>I learned that the Park gardeners had endeavoured to
check the extension of the disease—for it spread almost
visibly in places—by spraying the vegetation with the usual
vermin-killers; but these had been found to have no
influence upon the growth of the smitten areas.</p>
<p>By this time, the newspapers had begun to make the
matter a main feature. The heading: “<span class="smcap">The Blight</span>”
occupied the principal column; and correspondence had
been opened on the subject in several of the journals. But
as yet the matter was not exciting any interest outside
London. It was regarded as a purely local manifestation of
no particular import; and although some of the writers of
London Letters for the provincial Press alluded to it in
their articles, it was usually referred to with a sneer at the
“silly season attitude” of supposedly weighty newspapers.</p>
<p>This tone underwent a rapid change, however, on the
following day. Even the staid dailies of the Provinces
became electrified with the news; and over most of the
area of southern England the breakfast tables were ahum
with conversations on the Blight and its effects; for the
morning papers were filled with telegrams announcing the
extension of the affected area broadcast over the Home
Counties; and the headlines ran:</p>
<p class="center">SPREAD OF THE NEW BLIGHT</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">All Home Counties Affected</span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="allsmcap">TOTAL FAILURE OF CROPS FEARED</span></p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 class="nobreak"><small>CHAPTER III</small><br/>
<i>B. Diazotans</i><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_1" id="FNanchor_1">[1]</a></h2>
<p><span class="smcap">At</span> this point, I remember, the long spell of dry weather
reached its end. A heavy series of thunderstorms marked
its termination; and for three days the country was deluged
with rain and swept by intermittent gales. The cracked
ground drank up the moisture; but still more showers fell,
until there was mud everywhere.</p>
<p>These meteorological changes in themselves were sufficiently
grave from the farmer’s point of view; but even
more serious was the state of things revealed after the rain
had ceased. Whether it was due to the weather conditions
or whether it was a vagary produced by factors beyond
discovery will never be known; but the fact is established
that the spread of the Blight became accentuated during the
rainy period. Wherever it had secured a hold during the
hot weather it became more malignant in its effects; and
its extension to fresh fields was so great that hardly a grain-growing
area in the country escaped at this time. It
penetrated as far north as the Border agricultural districts;
and devastated fields were found even in Perthshire.</p>
<p>Since the potato blight in 1845, no such rapid and
extensive destruction of food supplies had been known.
The standing crops in the affected areas withered; and a
total failure of the home-grown cereals seemed to be inevitable.
Nor was it only in this section of the food-supply
that the attacks of the Blight became evident. Fruit-trees
seemed arrested in their productivity; vegetables failed to
ripen and began to rot. Everywhere the vegetable kingdom
seemed to be falling into a decline. The great market-gardens
and nurseries showed the trace of the same mysterious
agent. Roses withered on their stems; and even the hot-house
plants suffered equally with their open-air fellows.
The only crop which appeared to escape the general disaster
was hay.</p>
<p>And now it became clear that the Blight, as it was still
called, was going to produce effects in the most widely-separated
fields of activity. With a total failure of the
crops, the financial side of the question came to the front.
Throughout the length and breadth of the land, small
farmers were beginning to realise that it was to be a year
of utter disaster, ending probably in bankruptcy and ruin.
The larger land-owners looked forward to the collapse of
tenants and the failure of rents. Mortgage-holders began
to consider the nature of their security, and when it was
agricultural land they were placed in doubt as to their best
course; for no one could foresee whether the Blight was
a temporary epidemic or a permanent factor which would
reappear with the next crops. And all these varying influences
had their effects upon the great financial operations
of the City; for even in that industrial age the land had
maintained its value as a basic security which apparently
could not suffer deterioration beyond a definite point.</p>
<p>This, however, was only a minor field of the Blight’s
reactions. With the probable failure of the home crop
looming before him, even the man in the street could not
fail to perceive the more obvious results. It meant a greater
dependence upon imported food-stuffs and especially imported
grain. Argentina, Canada, India and the United States
must make up the missing supplies; and since almost half
our cereals were home-grown at that period, the price of
food was certain to rise by leaps and bounds; so that every
family in the land would be affected by the catastrophe.</p>
<p>Then a further factor was brought to light. With the
failure of grain and even of grass, it would be impossible to
keep alive the cattle which furnished part of the nation’s
food. The milk supply would be gravely affected also, from
the same cause.</p>
<p>It is difficult for us now to look back and catch again the
spirit of that time. Never before, even during the war,
had the food of Britain been endangered to such a degree.
And the steadily rising prices were sufficient to bring home
to the most thoughtless the actual imminence of the peril.
I can recall, however, that at first there was no panic of
any kind. It was assumed by all of us that although we
might have to go short of our usual lavish supplies, yet we
should always have enough food to carry us through to the
next harvest. The whole world was our granary; and if
we were prepared to pay the higher prices which we saw to
be inevitable, we had no reason to suppose that we should
lack imported grain. Our attitude was quite comprehensible
under the circumstances, I think. In the past we had
always been able to obtain food; and there seemed no doubt
that the same would hold good through this shortage.</p>
<p>The newspapers were fairly evenly divided in their
expressed opinions. The Government had recently adjourned
Parliament, after a session in which their majority had
oscillated dangerously more than once, and the Opposition
Press seized upon the Blight in order to embarrass the
Cabinet, and especially the Prime Minister, as far as possible.
They clamoured that the Government should take steps to
secure the food supply of the country by making immediate
purchases of wheat in the foreign markets. They demanded
that a system of rationing should be established forthwith;
and that cases of food-hoarding should be stringently punished.
Day after day they held up to public obloquy the individual
members of the Cabinet, who were then scattered on holiday;
the amusements of each of them were described and coupled
with sneering hopes that they would succeed better in their
games than they had done in the government of the country
and the safeguarding of the national interests. Echoes of
the Mazanderan Development Syndicate scandal were kept
alive in the most ingenious manner.</p>
<p>The Government Press, naturally, professed to see in the
inactivity of the Cabinet a proof that they had the matter
well in hand. Avoidance of panic, restriction by voluntary
effort of all unnecessary consumption of food, and the postponement
of inquiries likely to interfere with the wise
projects of the Premier: these formed the stock of their
leading articles.</p>
<p>The gutter organ of the Opposition retorted by publishing
the complete menu of the Premier’s dinner on the
previous day, which it had obtained from some waiter in
the hotel at which he was staying; and it accompanied this
item of news by interspersed extracts from the Government
organs in which appeals had been made for a less luxurious
form of living.</p>
<p>It must be remembered that this stage of the sequence
of events occupied only a brief period. If I am not wrong,
it was within ten days of the outbreak of the Blight that
we got the first American cables announcing the appearance
of the epidemic among the great wheat areas of the Middle
West. Almost immediately after came similar news from
Canada.</p>
<p>The meaning of this was not at first appreciated by the
people as a whole. They still clung to the idea that grain
would be forthcoming if a sufficiently high price were paid
for it; but those of us who had tried to forecast the possibilities
of the situation found our worst fears taking concrete
form. Soon even the unthinking were forced to understand
what the American news implied. If the Blight spread
over the wheat-fields of the Western continent, there would
be no surplus grain there for export at all. That source of
supply would barely suffice for the mouths at home.</p>
<p>Then, following each other like hammer-strokes upon
metal, each biting deeper than the last, came the cables
from the rest of the world. Egypt reported the outbreak
of the Blight in the Nile valley; British East Africa became
affected. The news from the Argentine fell like a thunderbolt,
for we realised that with it the last great open source
of wheat had failed. The Don and Volga basins followed
with the same tale. Over India, the Blight raged with
almost unheard-of virulence. Then, days after the others,
Australia was smitten, and our last hopes vanished.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>During all this period, it must be remembered, we had
no idea of the origin of our calamities. We referred to the
thing always as “The Blight,” though it was made clear at
quite an early stage that no plant parasite was concerned in
the matter at all. The most careful microscopic examination
of affected vegetation had been made without revealing
anything in the nature of a fungus or noxious growth.</p>
<p>Yet, on looking backward, I cannot help feeling that we,
and especially I myself, were strangely blind to the obvious
in the matter. I have already mentioned that when I
rooted up a clump of grass in Regent’s Park it came away
from the soil without resistance; and that when I examined
the roots I found them almost as free of earthy deposit
as if it had been grown in sand. That, coupled with what
I already knew, should have put me on the track of the
explanation; and yet I failed to draw the simplest deduction
from what I observed. To account for this obtuseness, I
can only suggest that already the idea of a “Blight” had
taken root in my mind; and that I was so obsessed with
the idea of a parasite that I never considered the facts from
any other point of view. Since others proved to be equally
slow in arriving at the truth, I can only conclude that they
were misled in their mental processes much as I myself was.</p>
<p>As I have said on a previous page, it was to Johnston,
the bacteriologist, that we owe the discovery. It appears
that he had been growing some bacteria in cultures; and,
whether by accident or design, he had left one of his
cultivation media open to the air. On examining the
germs some days later, he had discovered in the culture
a type of bacterium with which he was unfamiliar. He
proceeded to isolate it in the usual way—I believe it is done
by dabbing a needle-point into the culture and using the
few micro-organisms which stick to the needle as the
parents of a fresh colony—and he was amazed at its
fecundity. There had never been such a case of bacterial
fertility in his experience.</p>
<p>A paper in the <i>Lancet</i> brought the description of the
creature to the notice of the scientific world. Johnston
himself had not recognised the nature of the organism, as
he had never dealt with this type of bacteria before; but
from his description an agricultural bacteriologist named
Vincent was able to identify it as being almost identical
with one of the denitrifying group, from which it differed
only in its immense power of multiplication. It was
hurriedly christened <i>Bacterium diazotans</i>, on account of its
denitrifying qualities. Further examination showed that
its capacity for breaking down nitrogenous material far
surpassed that of any known denitrifying agent.</p>
<p>With these discoveries, the mystery of the new blight
vanished. An examination of the soil of stricken areas
showed that it swarmed with colonies of <i>B. diazotans</i>—to
use the customary medical contraction—and the whole
secret of the destruction was revealed.</p>
<p>It was evident that these new and super-active bacteria
attacked the soil, disintegrated all the nitrogenous compounds
within their range and thus left the plants without
nourishment. The death of the plant followed as a natural
result; but the matter did not end there. By destroying
the nitrogenous compounds in the soil, the bacteria altered
the whole texture of the earth in which they grew. All the
nitrogenous organic matter which forms so large a part of
the binding material of some soils was destroyed utterly;
with the consequence that the mineral particles, which
previously had been resting in an organic matrix, were now
free to move. Only the clays retained their tenacious
character: all other soils degenerated into sand.</p>
<p>There has, of course, been a great deal of speculation
upon the origin of <i>B. diazotans</i>. Hartwell suggested that
it came to us from Venus, propelled by light-pressure across
the abysses of space. Inshelwood put forward the view that
in <i>B. diazotans</i> we had an example of bacteria, originally
endemic, changing their habits and spreading into fresh
regions.</p>
<p>Personally, I believe neither hypothesis. I feel sure that
I saw the birth of the first <i>B. diazotans</i> on that night in
Wotherspoon’s laboratory, under the action of the fire-ball;
and the evidence is simple enough.</p>
<p>Every living creature is a wonderfully constructed
electrical machine. Each beat of our hearts, each systole
of our lungs, each contraction of a muscle in our frame
produces a tiny electrical current. Our organism is a mass
of colloids and electrolytes which transmit these charges
hither and thither throughout our systems; and were we
gifted with an electrical sense in addition to those which
we already have, we should see each other as complexities
of conductors along which currents were playing with every
movement of our body.</p>
<p>This complex electrical system is acutely sensible to
external electrical conditions. Anyone who has held the
handles of an induction coil or who has taken a spark
from a Leyden jar knows the physiological effects which
these things produce. The influence of high-tension currents
upon the growth of plants has been proved beyond
dispute.</p>
<p>Now it seems to me that in this effect of an external
electric charge upon the internal mechanism of an organism
we have a clue to the origin of these new bacteria. I have
already told how the fire-ball, in its explosion, shattered
the denitrifying cultures in Wotherspoon’s room; and it
seems clear that at the moment of the concussion there
must have been a tremendous play of electrical forces about
the spot. We know hardly anything with regard to the
nature of the electrical fields existing in such things as
these fire-balls; and it is quite possible that they may be
different from anything of which we have any knowledge
among the more usual displays of electrical energy. I believe,
then, that it is in the action of the fire-ball that we
must seek for an explanation of the change in habit of
Wotherspoon’s denitrifying bacteria.</p>
<p>Again, I have mentioned my observation of the rapid
multiplication of the denitrifying bacteria which I made
with Wotherspoon’s microscope on the following day. That
also seems to me to have a bearing upon the problem;
though I admit quite frankly that my evidence is only that
of a layman. It is in every way regrettable that Wotherspoon,
having tired of using his room as an exhibit, should
have cleared away every trace of the wreckage before any
expert examination of it could be made; for in this way
the crucial evidence on the point was destroyed.</p>
<p>Further, in support of my views, I would point out that
the very first known occurrence of <i>B. diazotans</i> was that
which had Regent’s Park as its site; and that the first
place of attack was in the immediate neighbourhood of
Wotherspoon’s house in Cumberland Terrace. This can
hardly be disregarded, when it is considered in connection
with the other facts which I have mentioned.</p>
<p>At this time of day there can be no question that London
formed the focus from which <i>B. diazotans</i> spread throughout
the world. I have described the ramifications of the great
air-services; and it seems to me obvious that the organisms
were carried to and fro upon the surface of the globe by the
agency of the aeroplanes. The order of attack at various
points indicates this very clearly, in my opinion. First came
the American and Egyptian outbreaks; then Uganda and
South America; and finally, long after the others, Australia
showed traces of the devastation. I have checked the possible
dates of arrival in these various places, taking into account
the relative swiftnesses of the aeroplanes on the different
routes; and the results can hardly be gainsaid. Allowing, as
one must, a certain latitude for the time of development of
the microbe in various spots, there seems little doubt that
the dates of the outbreaks fell into the same succession
as the times of arrival of the various London air-services.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 class="nobreak"><small>CHAPTER IV</small><br/>


Panic</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">In</span> dealing with the subsequent stage of affairs in this
country, I feel myself at a loss. Matters of fact, sequences
of events, definite incidents in a chain of affairs: all these
can be described without much difficulty and with a certain
detachment on the part of the narrator. But when it comes
to indicating the transition from one psychological state to
another, the task is one which would require for its proper
fulfilment a more practised pen than mine; and it is
precisely this transitional period which I must now attempt
to make clear in retrospect; for without an understanding
of it my narrative would lack one of its corner-stones.</p>
<p>Apart from the mere question of narration, however,
there is a further difficulty which cannot be evaded. I
myself passed through this crisis and underwent day by day
these changes in outlook which I shall have to portray; so
that the personal factor cannot be eliminated from my
account. Yet my own feelings and views must not be
allowed to monopolise the field; since they had not the
slightest influence upon the main current of popular feeling.</p>
<p>I have used the word “current,” and perhaps it is the
best one which I could have chosen to express the thing
which baffles me. As a man walks by the side of a
mountain stream, he sees the volume of the water change as
it grows from rill to rivulet and from rivulet to river; yet
no single tributary is of any notable size. Gradually, almost
imperceptibly, the banks diverge, the sound of the running
water grows louder and yet louder: until at last comes a
sweep over the rapids and the thunder of the fall below.</p>
<p>It was in this way that events merged into each other
between the outbreak and the complete realisation of our fears.
The transition from security to panic was not made in one
swift step. Rather it came little by little, and at no point
could one indicate precisely how the public feeling had changed
from that of the previous day. A whole series of tiny
impulses, each in itself almost negligible, served to drive us
from one mental position to the next; and a complete
analysis of the psychology of the time would be an impossible
task. I propose, therefore, merely to indicate some of these
innumerable factors which played upon our spirits; so that
this blank in my narrative may be filled in some way, even
if only roughly.</p>
<p>It was not until the Blight had spread far over the Home
Counties that the general public became interested in the
matter at all; and at this period the mass of people in the
country districts were almost the only ones who saw any
cause for alarm. The town-dwellers seldom came in
direct contact with the sources of their food-supply; in fact
it is doubtful if the lower-class Londoner of the old days
could have answered a direct question as to the date of
harvesting. Food came to them daily in a form which
suggested very little with regard to its original nature.
Wheat they knew only in the form of bread or flour; meat
was divorced almost entirely from the shapes of the animals
from which it was derived; tea, coffee and sugar brought
with them no visions of tea-gardens on the Indian hills or
sugar plantations under the West Indian sun. The furthest
traceable point of origin of these things, as far as most of the
population was concerned, was to be found in the retail shops.
Thus there was a certain sluggishness in apprehension among
the main bulk of the people when they read in the newspapers
that the crops had failed. To them, it simply meant that
we should have to buy in another market; just as they had
to go to a fresh grocer when their own dealer ran short of
some commodity which they required.</p>
<p>In the country districts, and especially in the great centres
of the agricultural portions of the kingdom, the outlook was
different, but still restricted in its scope. Failure of the
crops to them meant financial loss, hard times, stringency,
urgent personal economy and the hope of better luck in the
following season. Though closer to the soil, the country
folk were unmoved by any outlook wider than that which
included the direct effects of the Blight upon their industry.
And, indeed, they had little time in which to speculate
upon ultimate reactions, for their attention was concentrated
almost wholly upon their efforts to remedy the damage
already done or to protect from injury any portions of the
crop which had not yet been attacked.</p>
<p>Thus at this stage the mental surface of the country as a
whole remained unruffled. Here and there, of course, a
few of us had grasped what might be entailed if the Blight
destroyed the whole of the home supplies; but I doubt if
even the most far-sighted had imagined that anything but a
local shortage was in prospect.</p>
<p>With the arrival of the American cables, the situation
changed slightly. The tone of the newspapers became
graver, and they endeavoured to awake their readers to the
fact that the possibility of a serious shortage had become a
certainty. Edition after edition poured out from the
printing-presses and the headlines grew in magnitude from
hour to hour. “<i>The Blight in America</i>” was the first type
of intimation, which attracted but little interest and was
placed in the “third-class” column of the papers. Then
came appreciation of the importance of the news; the headlines
increased in size and moved up nearer the centre of
readers’ interest: “<i>Spread of the Blight in the Wheat Districts</i>.”
Next came a sudden jump to the first place on the page and
heavily leaded type in the headlines: “<i>Failure of Wheat
Crop in America</i>.”</p>
<p>Even at this stage, the readers as a whole failed to connect
the news with anything in their daily life. Gradually it
was borne in upon their minds that the collapse of the
American crops—including the Canadian—meant a very
rapid rise in the price of cereal food-stuffs; but further than
this they refused to look. At that time the cattle question
had not been noticed at all; and the general feeling simply
resolved itself into a decision to avoid bread as far as possible
and eat meat instead.</p>
<p>With the arrival of reports from the remaining wheat-growing
districts, the newspapers increased their efforts to
awaken their readers to the gravity of the situation. “<i>The
World Shortage</i>” occupied the place of honour in their
columns, and was supported by telegrams and cables from
all parts of the globe telling the same tale of crop failure
with a steady monotony.</p>
<p>As I look back upon these days I can only marvel at the
ingrained conservatism of the human mind. It is true that
on the whole the public were at last beginning to understand
the situation. They had grasped the fact that almost all the
known regions of wheat-growing land had been attacked;
and that a shortage was inevitable. But, none the less, in
their inmost thoughts they still clung to the fixed idea that
<i>somewhere</i> in the world there was bound to be a store of
wheat—or if not wheat, then rice or some other edible
grain—which would enable us to pass through the coming
winter without undue restriction of our food supplies. It
was perhaps a manifestation of that eternal optimism which
is necessary if the race is to survive at all; or possibly it
represented a trust in the Government’s capacity to arrange
some means whereby supplies would be forthcoming in due
course. Whatever its origin, it was among the most marked
features of that strange time.</p>
<p>I remember that one of the side-issues of the disaster
created at that stage far deeper impressions than the catastrophe
itself. With the failure of the American supplies
over a huge area, the Wheat Pit became convulsed with an
outbreak of gambling such as had never been seen before.
Chicago went crazy; and legitimate business gave place to
a fury of speculation which grew ever more intense as the
news came in of further extensions of the devastated areas.
Before the Blight appeared in America, December wheat
had been offered at 233¼; but in the earlier stages of the
game of speculation it rushed up to 405: and before the
end came it was dealt with at prices which were purely
illusory, since they corresponded to nothing tangible in
commodities. Thousands of bears were ruined in the
preliminary moves; and in the end the whole machinery of
the Pit was brought to a standstill owing to there being no
sellers.</p>
<p>Of course that series of transactions had no real influence
upon the course of events; but the public, both here and in
America, failed to see this; and the bitterest feelings found
vent concerning “gambling in the food of the people.” It
is quite possible that the anger uselessly expended on this
subject served to keep the public from concentrating their
attention upon the real problem of the world shortage.
Huge quantities of wheat were dealt with on paper; and
the people, being unfamiliar with the methods of Chicago
speculation, assumed that these enormous transactions
actually represented the transfer of millions of bushels of
real grain from seller to buyer. The sharp upward trend
of flour and bread prices at home served to confirm their
impression that the gambling in the Pit was responsible for
their troubles; and Rodman’s attempt—which was practically
successful—to corner wheat, led to violent criticism and
even, at one time, to an effort to lynch him.</p>
<p>It was not only in the wheat market that this fever of
speculation showed itself. Maize, oats, barley and cotton
also became counters in the game and rose to incredible
prices. Unknown men appeared in the world of finance
and for days maintained their positions as controllers of the
markets. Many of the great firms in America ventured
their capital rashly and suffered disaster.</p>
<p>In its ultimate effects also, the gamble in food-stuffs
exerted a profound influence on the stream of public opinion.
The news of the speculations in Chicago, the descriptions
of the turbulent scenes in the Wheat Pit, where at one time
revolvers were fired by super-excited members, the tales of
huge fortunes won and lost in a day, the deep under-current
of resentment at this callous trading upon the world’s
necessities, all tended in the end to bring into view the real
state of the wheat question. And now the newspapers were
printing the single word FAMINE as a headline; and the
people were beginning to ask in ominous tones: “What is
the Government doing?”</p>
<p>It was at this time that, to my profound surprise, I
received a private letter from the Prime Minister requesting
my attendance at a meeting which he had arranged.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 class="nobreak"><small>CHAPTER V</small><br/>


Nordenholt</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">Probably</span> with a view to avoiding the attention of the
Press, the meeting was held elsewhere than at No. 10
Downing Street. I found myself in what looked like a
Board meeting-room. A fire burned in the grate, for it
was a chilly day. Down the centre of the room stretched
a long table around which a number of men were sitting,
some of whom were familiar as great figures in the industrial
world. At the head of the table I recognised the Premier,
flanked on either hand by a Cabinet Minister. A chair
was vacant half-way up the table, opposite the fireplace;
and I took it on a gesture from the Premier.</p>
<p>Almost at once, the Prime Minister rose to his feet. He
looked worn and agitated; but even under the evidences of
the strain he endeavoured to assume a cheerful and confident
air. He was a man I had never trusted; and I now had
my first opportunity of examining him at close quarters. In
repose, his face fell into the heavy lines of the successful
barrister; but when he became animated, a mechanical
smile flitted across it which in some way displeased me
more than the expression which it veiled. He seemed to
me a typical example of the <i>faux bonhomme</i>. In politics he
had gained a reputation for dilatory conduct combined with
a mastery in the art of managing a majority; and his mind
was saturated with the idea of Party advantage. Of real
loyalty I suspect he had very little; but when one of his
Cabinet blundered heavily, he would step into the limelight
with a fine gesture and assume all responsibility. In this
way he kept his Government intact and gained a reputation
for fidelity without losing anything; for he well knew that
no one would call him to account for the responsibility
which he had assumed.</p>
<p>“Gentlemen,” he said, “you will probably wonder why
we have invited you to meet us here to-day. We all know
the unhappy state of affairs into which the country has
fallen. There is dissatisfaction abroad; and the Government
is being held responsible for conditions which were
none of its making. I will speak plainly to you, for it is
no time for reservations. Something must be done to allay
public anxiety, which is growing more intense as time goes
on. I am not one of those who take these passing scares
seriously; but we cannot afford to ignore the present feeling:
and some measures are necessary to satisfy this clamour.
It is a time when all of us must come to the aid of the
Executive.</p>
<p>“The Cabinet is dispersed at the moment. Many of the
members are abroad and are unable to return at present,
owing to a disorganisation of transport. But pending their
return and the decisions which we shall then be forced to
take, I thought it right to call together you gentlemen,
large employers of labour, and to enlist your aid in the
work we shall have to do. It is essential that the Government
should retain public confidence at the present time.
I think we are agreed upon that point. Nothing could be
more fatal than a General Election forced upon us under
the reigning conditions.</p>
<p>“We have taken steps to call Parliament together immediately,
in order to lay before it certain measures which
we believe will enable us to tide over this crisis. But in
the meantime we must try to pacify the working classes,
who are being agitated by the dismal forecasts of the newspapers.
I have no desire to inquire into the origin of the
jeremiads which are being printed daily in a certain group
of papers; but I cannot help noticing that they all tend
towards a discrediting of myself and my colleagues. There
is a cry for action; whereas I think all of you will agree
that consideration is required, so that the action, if it
should become necessary, may be well-contrived.</p>
<p>“It is in these circumstances that we have called you
gentlemen together. We propose to lay before you the
main points of our scheme; and when you have heard
them, we count upon you, as great employers of labour,
to lay the matter before your employés. We shall use the
newspapers also to disseminate our proposals; but personal
efforts can do more than any printed appeals. I trust that
we shall not look in vain for the cordial co-operation which
is absolutely requisite at this crisis.”</p>
<p>As this speech proceeded, I had become more and more
uneasy. Through it all ran the governing thought that
something must be done, which was true enough; but the
thing which he proposed to do, it appeared to me, was to
persuade the country that all was well, whereas I felt that
the essential matter was to prepare against a practical
calamity.</p>
<p>“We have given a great deal of thought to our proposals,
though we have not wasted time in the consideration of
details. The broad outlines are all that are required for
our present purpose; and we have confined our attention
to them. My friend the Home Secretary”—he indicated
the colleague who sat on his left—“will be good enough
to read to you the heads of our decisions. I may say,
however, that these decisions are only of a temporary nature.
We may find it necessary to modify some of them in due
course; and they must not be regarded as in any way final.
Possibly”—he let the mechanical smile play over the company—“possibly
some of those present may be able to
suggest certain modifications at this meeting. If these
modifications are such that we can adopt them, we shall be
only too glad to do so.”</p>
<p>He sat down; and the Home Secretary rose in his turn.
Saxenham had the reputation of being dull but honest. He
had no force of character, but he had won his way into the
Cabinet mainly because he had never been known to stoop
to a false action in the whole course of his career. On this
account he represented a mainstay of the Government, which
in other ways was not too scrupulous. His brain was one
which worked slowly; and his personal admiration for the
Prime Minister was such that he followed him blindly
without seeing too clearly whither he was being led. He
cleared his throat and took up a sheet of paper which
contained the Government proposals.</p>
<p>“I think that it will be best if I take the various proposals
seriatim and elucidate each of them, as I come to it, by a
short commentary.</p>
<p>“<i>First</i>, we shall issue a Government statement to the
Press with the object of reassuring the public and putting
an end to this rising clamour for action in haste. In this
statement we shall call attention to the fact that there is at
present a twelve-weeks’ supply of food in the country, which,
with due care, would itself be sufficient to last the population
until the next harvest. We shall make it clear that the
Government have under earnest consideration the steps
which it may be necessary to take in the future; and we
shall appeal to the public to pay no heed to alarmist
statements from interested quarters.</p>
<p>“<i>Second</i>, we shall advise the King to issue a Proclamation
on the same lines. We believe that this may have a
greater effect in some quarters than an official Government
statement.</p>
<p>“<i>Third</i>, we shall make arrangements for taking over the
food stores in the country, though we hope that it will not
be necessary to do so.</p>
<p>“<i>Fourth</i>, we shall make arrangements to purchase with
the national moneys the surplus food supplies of grain. We
shall be able to pay higher prices than private importers;
and I have little doubt that we shall thus be able to stock
our granaries with food sufficient to carry us through until
well beyond the next harvest.</p>
<p>“<i>Fifth</i>, we shall prepare a system of rationing, as soon
as we have obtained our supplies and know definitely how
much food can be allotted per head to the population.</p>
<p>“<i>Sixth</i>, since a continuance of the present crisis will
undoubtedly lead to widespread distress and unemployment,
we propose to take under consideration a system of unemployment
relief; so that there may be no centres of
disturbance generated among the population by idleness
or lack of money.</p>
<p>“<i>Seventh</i>, we shall invite the scientific experts on agriculture
to devote their attention to the problem of increasing
the crops in the next harvest, so that such a state of affairs
as this may not again arise.”</p>
<p>He paused, with an air of finality, though he did not
resume his seat. At the head of the table, the Prime
Minister was apparently plunged in thought. Suddenly I
was struck by the employment to which the third member
of the Cabinet was putting his time. With the sheets of
paper in front of him he was constructing a series of toys.
A box, a cock-boat, an extraordinarily life-like frog lay
before him on the table, and he was busily engaged in the
production of something which looked like a bird. I learned
afterwards that this was a trick of his, the outcome of his
peculiarly nervous temperament. Not wishing to be detected
watching him, I turned my eyes away; and as I
swept my glance round the table, I suddenly found myself
in turn the object of scrutiny.</p>
<p>My first impression was of two steel-blue eyes fixed upon
my own with an almost disquieting intensity of gaze. I
had the feeling of being examined, not only physically but
mentally, as though by some hypnotic power my very
thoughts were being brought to light. Usually, in a casual
interchange of glances, one or other of two is diverted
almost at once; but in this case I felt in some way unable
to withdraw my eyes from those before me; while my
<i>vis-à-vis</i> continued to examine me with a steadfast attention
which, strangely enough, suggested no rudeness.</p>
<p>He was a man of more than the average height, over six
feet I found later when he rose from his chair. His features
suggested no particular race, though there was an elusive
resemblance to the Red Indian type which I felt rather
than saw; but this was perhaps intensified by the jet-black
hair and the clean-shaven face. All these are mere details
of little importance. What impressed me most about him
was an air of conscious power, which would have singled
him out in any gathering. Looking from him to the
Prime Minister, it crossed my mind that while the Premier
counterfeited power in his appearance, this unknown embodied
it; and yet there was no parade, for he appeared
to be entirely devoid of self-consciousness. Before he
removed his eyes from mine I saw an inscrutable smile
curve his lips. I say inscrutable, for I could not read
what it meant; but it resembled the expression of a man
who has just checked a calculation and found it to be
accurate.</p>
<p>It has taken me some time to describe this incident; but
actually it can have occupied hardly more than a fraction
of a minute; for, as I took my eyes away from his, I heard
the Home Secretary continue:</p>
<p>“These, gentlemen, are our proposals; and I think that
they cover the necessary ground. We wish especially to
draw your attention to the sixth one: for it is that which
has chiefly moved us to lay these matters before you ere
we make them public. It concerns unemployment, if you
remember. We have brought you into our councils because
all of you are large employers of labour in different lines of
industry; and we would welcome any suggestions from you
now with regard to the possible modes of application of this
scheme in practice. As Mr. Biles has told you, it is essential
at this moment to avoid discontent among the proletariat.
Europe is in a very disturbed condition, and a change of
Government at this juncture would have disastrous effects.
I can say no more upon that point; but I wish you to
understand that we urgently require your co-operation at
this time.”</p>
<p>He sat down; and the Prime Minister rose again.</p>
<p>“I think you will see, gentlemen, from what the Home
Secretary has said, that the Government has the situation
well in hand. The only matter about which we are at all
concerned is the liquor question. It is clear that we can
hardly sacrifice grain for the manufacture of alcohol until
we are sure that we have in stock a sufficiency of food
for the country’s needs. A shortage of liquor, however,
may lead to industrial unrest; and it is this possible unrest
which we desire your help in preventing. We wish if
possible to get directly into touch with the workers of the
nation; and we have approached you first of all. Later we
intend to interview the Trades Union leaders with the
same object. But time presses; and I shall be glad to hear
any criticisms of our plans if you will be so good as to give
your views.”</p>
<p>He sank back into his chair and again the smile faded
almost at once. For a moment there was a pause. Then
the man opposite me rose to his feet.</p>
<p>“Who is that?” I whispered to my neighbour.</p>
<p>“Nordenholt.”</p>
<p>Nordenholt! I looked at him with even more attention
than before. For two decades that name had rung through
the world, and yet, meeting him now face to face, I had
not recognised him. Nor was this astonishing; for no
portrait of him had ever come to my notice. The daily
photo papers, the illustrated weeklies, even <i>Punch</i> itself, had
never printed so much as a sketch of him. He had leaped
into fame simply as a name to which no physical complement
had been attached. By some mysterious influence
behind the scenes, he had avoided the usual Press illustrator
with a success which left him unrecognisable to the man
in the street.</p>
<p>So this—I looked at him again—so this was Nordenholt,
the Platinum King, the multi-millionaire, wrecker of two
Governments. No wonder that I had felt him to be out of
the common. I am no hero-worshipper; yet Nordenholt
had always exercised an attraction upon my mind, even
though he was only a name. In many respects he seemed
to be the kind of man I should have liked to be, if I had his
character and gifts.</p>
<p>When he rose, I found that his voice matched his appearance;
it was deep, grave and harmonious, although he
spoke without any rhetorical turn. Had he chosen to force
himself to the front in politics, that instrument would have
served him to sway masses of men by its mere charm. I
thought that I detected a faint sub-tinge of irony in it as he
began. He wasted no time upon preliminaries but went
straight to the point.</p>
<p>“Are we to understand that this paper in the hands
of the Home Secretary contains a full statement of the
measures which the Cabinet—or such members of it as are
available—have decided upon up to the present?”</p>
<p>The Prime Minister nodded assent. I seemed to detect
a certain uneasiness in his pose since Nordenholt had
risen.</p>
<p>“May I see the paper?... Thank you.”</p>
<p>He read it over slowly and then, still retaining it in his
hand, continued:</p>
<p>“Perhaps I have not fathomed your purpose in drawing
it up; but if I am correct in my interpretation, it seems
to me an excellent scheme. I doubt if anything better
could be devised.”</p>
<p>The nervous frown left the Premier’s face and was
replaced by a satisfied smile; the Home Secretary, after a
pause of mental calculation, also seemed to be relieved;
while the Colonial Secretary put down his paper model and
looked up at Nordenholt with an expression of mild astonishment.
It was evident that they had hardly expected
this approval. The hint of irony in the speaker’s voice
grew more pronounced:</p>
<p>“This scheme of yours, if I am not mistaken, is a piece
of window-dressing, pure and simple. You felt that you
had to make some show of energy; and to pacify the
public you bring forward these proposals. The first two of
them achieve nothing practical; and the remaining five
concern steps which you propose to take at some future
time, but which you have not yet considered fully. Am I
correct?”</p>
<p>The Colonial Secretary broke in angrily in reply:</p>
<p>“I object to the word window-dressing. These proposals
give in outline the steps which we shall take in due
course. They represent the principles which we shall use
as our guides. You surely did not expect us to work out
the details for this meeting?”</p>
<p>Nordenholt’s voice remained unchanged.</p>
<p>“No, I did not expect <i>you</i> to have worked out the details
of this scheme. I will confine myself to principles if you
wish it. I see that in the fourth clause you anticipate the
purchase of foreign grain, though at an enhanced price.
May I ask where you propose to secure it? It is common
knowledge that it cannot be obtained within the Empire,
so presumably you have some other granary in your minds.
Possibly you have already taken steps.”</p>
<p>The face of the Colonial Secretary lit up with a flash of
malice.</p>
<p>“You are quite correct in both conjectures. Australia
and Canada have suffered so severely from the Blight that
we can expect nothing from them, and I am afraid that
Russia is in the same condition. But we have actually
issued instructions to agents in America to purchase all
the wheat which they can obtain, and advices have
arrived showing that we control already a very large
supply.”</p>
<p>“Excellent forethought. I fear, however, that it has
been wasted through no fault of yours. At ten o’clock
this morning, the Government of the United States prohibited
the export of food-stuffs of any description. You
will not get your supplies.”</p>
<p>“But that is contrary to their Constitution! How can
they do that?” The Prime Minister was evidently
startled. “And how do you come to know of it while we
have had no advice?”</p>
<p>“A censorship was established over the American cables
and wireless just before this decision was made public.
They do not wish it to be known here until they have had
time to make their arrangements. My information came
through my private wireless, which was seized immediately
after transmitting it.”</p>
<p>“But ... but ...” stammered the Home Secretary,
“this complicates our arrangements in a most unforeseen
manner. It is a most serious piece of news. Biles, we
never took that into account.”</p>
<p>“Sufficient unto the day, Saxenham. This Government
has been in difficult places before; but we always succeeded
in turning the corner successfully. Don’t let us
yield to panic now. If we think over the matter for a
while, I do not doubt that we shall see daylight through it
in the end.”</p>
<p>Nordenholt listened to this interchange of views in
scornful silence.</p>
<p>“One of the details which have still to be thought out,
I suppose, Biles,” he continued. “Don’t let it delay us at
present. There is another point upon which I wish some
information.”</p>
<p>The meeting was a curious study by this time. Almost
without seeming to notice it, Nordenholt had driven the
three Cabinet Ministers into a corner; and he now
seemed to dominate them as though they were clerks
who had been detected in scamping their work. Personality
was telling in the contest, for contest it had now
become.</p>
<p>“This news which I have given you implies that the
twelve-weeks’ supply of food in the country is all that
we have at our command anywhere. What do you propose
to do?”</p>
<p>“We shall have to take stock and begin the issue of
ration tickets as soon as possible.”</p>
<p>“Twelve-weeks’ supply; how long will that last the
country under your arrangements?”</p>
<p>The Colonial Secretary made a rapid calculation on a
sheet of paper.</p>
<p>“As we shall need to carry on till the next harvest, I
suppose it means that the daily ration will have to be
reduced to less than a quarter of the full amount—three-thirteenths,
to be exact.”</p>
<p>“And you are satisfied with that calculation?”</p>
<p>The Colonial Secretary glanced over his figures.</p>
<p>“Yes, I see no reason to alter it. Naturally it will mean
great privation; and the working class will be difficult to
keep in hand; but I see no objection to carrying on till
next year when the harvest will be due. The potato crop
will come in early and help us.”</p>
<p>Nordenholt looked at him for a moment and then laughed
contemptuously. Suddenly his almost pedantic phraseology
dropped away.</p>
<p>“Simpson, you beat the band. I never heard anything
like it.”</p>
<p>Then his manner changed abruptly.</p>
<p>“Do you mean to say,” he asked roughly, “that you
haven’t realised yet that there will be <i>no</i> next harvest?
Don’t you understand that things have changed, once for
all? The soil is done for. There will be no crops again
until every inch of it is revivified in some way. ‘The
potato crop will come in early and help us!’ I’ve consulted
some men who know; and they tell me that within
a year it will be impossible to raise more than a small
fraction even of the worst crop we ever saw in this
country.”</p>
<p>The Premier was the only one of the three who stood
fast under this blow.</p>
<p>“That is certainly a serious matter, Nordenholt,” he
said; “but there is nothing to be gained from hard words.
Let us think over the case, and I feel sure that some way
out of this apparent <i>impasse</i> can be found. Surely some
of these scientific experts could suggest something which
might get us out of the difficulty. I don’t despair. Past
experience has always shown that with care one can avoid
most awkward embarrassments.”</p>
<p>“The ‘awkward embarrassment,’ as you call it, amounts
to this. How are you going to feed fifty millions of people
for an indefinite time when your supplies are only capable
of feeding them normally for twelve weeks? Put them on
‘three-thirteenth rations’ as Simpson suggests; and when
the next harvest comes in you will find you have a good
deal less than ‘three-thirteenth rations’ per head for them.
What’s your solution, Biles? You will have to produce it
quick; for every hour you sit thinking means a bigger
inroad into the available supplies. Remember, this is something
new in your experience. You aren’t up against a
majority you can wheedle into taking your advice. This
time you are up against plain facts of Nature; and arguments
are out of court. Now I ask a plain question; and
I’m going to get a straight answer from you for once:
What are your plans?”</p>
<p>The Premier pondered the matter in silence for a couple
of minutes; then, apparently, the instinct of the old Parliamentary
hand came uppermost in his mind. The habits of
thought which have lasted through a generation cannot be
broken instantaneously. With a striving after dignity,
which was only half successful he said:</p>
<p>“Parliament is about to meet. I shall go there and lay
this matter before the Great Inquest of the nation and let
them decide.”</p>
<p>“Three days wasted; and probably two days of talk at
least before anything is settled; then two days more before
you can bring anything into gear: one week’s supplies
eaten up and nothing to show for it. Is that your solution?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“You are determined on that? No wavering?”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“Very good, Biles. I give you the fairest warning.
On the day that you meet the House of Commons, I shall
place upon the paper a series of questions which will expose
the very root of the Mazanderan scandal, and I shall supply
full information on the subject to the Opposition Press. I
have had every document in my possession for the last year.
I can prove that you yourself were in it up to the neck;
I have notes of all the transactions with Rimanez and Co.
And I know all about the Party Funds also. If that once
gets into print, Biles, you are done for—thumbs down!”</p>
<p>He imitated the old death sign of the Roman arena.
The Premier sat as if frozen in his chair. His face had
gone a dirty grey. Nordenholt towered over him with
contempt on his features. Suddenly the Colonial Secretary
sprang to his feet.</p>
<p>“This is blackmail, Nordenholt,” he cried furiously.
“Do you think you can do that sort of thing and not be
touched? You may think you are safe behind your millions;
but if you carried out your threat there isn’t a decent man
who would speak to you again. You daren’t do it!”</p>
<p>“If you speak to me like that again, Simpson, I’ll take care
that no decent man speaks to you either,” Nordenholt said,
calmly. “There’s another set of notes besides those on
Mazanderan. I have the whole dossier of the house in
Carshalton Terrace in my desk. I’ll publish them too,
unless you come to heel. It will be worse than Mazanderan,
Simpson. It will be prison.”</p>
<p>In his turn, the Colonial Secretary collapsed into his chair.
Whatever the threat had been, it had evidently brought him
face to face with ruin; and guilt was written across his
face.</p>
<p>But Saxenham had paid no attention to this interruption.
In his slow way he was evidently turning over in his mind
what Nordenholt had said to the Prime Minister; and now
he spoke almost in a tone of anguish:</p>
<p>“Johnnie, Johnnie,” he said. “Deny it! Deny it at
once. You can’t sit under that foul charge. Our hands
were clean, weren’t they? You said they were, in the
House. There’s no truth in what Nordenholt says, is there?
Is there, Johnnie?”</p>
<p>But the Premier sat like a statue in his chair, staring in
front of him with unseeing eyes. The affairs of the
Mazanderan Development Syndicate had been a bad business;
and if the connection between it and the Government
could be proved, after what had already passed, it was an
end of Biles and the total discredit of his Party. Nordenholt,
still on his feet, looked down at the silent figure
without a gleam of pity in his face. Somehow I understood
that he was playing for a great stake, though no flicker of
interest crossed his countenance.</p>
<p>The strain was broken by Saxenham getting to his feet.
I knew his record, and I could guess what his feelings must
have been. He stood there, a pathetic little figure, with
shaking hands and dim eyes, a worshipper who had found
his god only a broken image. He turned and looked at
us in a pitiful way and then faced round to the wrecker.</p>
<p>“Nordenholt,” he said, “he doesn’t deny it. Is it really
true? Can you give me your word?”</p>
<p>Nordenholt’s face became very gentle and all the hardness
died out of his voice.</p>
<p>“Yes, Saxenham, it is true. I give you my word of
honour for its truth. He can’t deny it.”</p>
<p>“Then I’ve backed a lie. I believed him. And now
I’ve misled people. I’ve gone on to platforms and denied
the truth of it; pledged my word that it was a malicious
falsehood. Oh! I can’t face it, Nordenholt. I can’t
face it. This finishes me with public service. I—I——”</p>
<p>He covered his face with his hands and I could see the
tears trickle between his fingers. He had paid his price for
being honest.</p>
<p>But the Premier was of sterner stuff. He looked up at
Nordenholt at last with a gleam of hatred which he suppressed
almost as it came:</p>
<p>“Well, Nordenholt, what’s your price?”</p>
<p>“So you’ve seen reason, Biles? Not like poor Saxenham,
eh?” There was an under-current of bitterness in the tone,
but it was almost imperceptible. “Well, it’s not hard.
You take your orders from me now. You cover me with
your full responsibility. You understand? You always
were good at assuming responsibility. Have it now.”</p>
<p>“Do I understand you to mean that you would like to be
a Dictator?”</p>
<p>“No, you haven’t got it quite correctly. I <i>mean</i> to be
Dictator.”</p>
<p>The Prime Minister had relapsed into his stony attitude.
There was no trace of feeling on his face; but I could
understand the mental commotion which must lie behind
that blank countenance. Under cover of fine phrases, he
had always sought the lowest form of Party advantage; his
political nostrum had become part and parcel of his individuality,
and he had never looked higher than the
intricacies of the Parliamentary game. Now, suddenly, he
had been brought face to face with reality; and it had
broken him. To do him justice, I believe that he might
have faced personal discredit with indifference. He had
done it before and escaped with his political life. But
Nordenholt had struck him on an even more vital spot. If
the Mazanderan affair came into the daylight, his Party
would be ruined; and he would have been responsible. I
give him the credit of supposing that it was upon the larger
and not upon the personal issue that he surrendered.</p>
<p>Nordenholt, having gained his object, refrained from
going further. He turned away from the upper end of the
table and addressed the rest of us.</p>
<p>“Gentlemen, you see the state of affairs. We cannot
wait for the slow machinery of politics to revolve through
its time-honoured cycles before beginning to act. Something
must be done at once. Every moment is now of
importance. I wish to lay before you what appears to me
the only method whereby we can save something out of the
wreck.</p>
<p>“I have been thinking out the problem with the greatest
care; and I believe that even now it is not too late, if you
will give me your support. This meeting was called at my
suggestion; and I supplied a list of your names because all
of you will be needed if my scheme is to be carried out.
But before I divulge it, I must ask from each of you an
absolutely unconditional promise of secrecy. Will you give
that, Ross? And you, Arbuthnot?...”</p>
<p>He went from individual to individual round the table;
and to my astonishment, used my own name with the
others. How he knew me, I could not understand.</p>
<p>When he had secured a promise from all present, he
continued:</p>
<p>“In the first place, I had better tell you what I have
done. Immediately the Blight began to ravage the American
wheat-fields, I bought up all the grain which was available
from last year’s crop and got it shipped as soon as possible.
It is on the high seas now; so we have evaded the new
prohibition of exports. I need not give you figures; but
it amounts to a considerable quantity. This, of course, I
carried through at my own expense.</p>
<p>“I have also had printed a series of ration tickets and
explanatory leaflets sufficient to last the whole country for
three weeks. This also I did at my private charges.</p>
<p>“Further, I have placed orders with the printers and
bill-posters for the placarding of certain notices. Some of
these, I expect, are already posted up on the hoardings.</p>
<p>“I mention these matters merely in order to show you
that I have not been idle and that I am fully convinced
of the necessity for speed.”</p>
<p>He paused for a few seconds to let this sink in.</p>
<p>“Now we come to the main problem. Saxenham has
told you the state of affairs; and I have supplemented it
sufficiently to allow of your forming a judgment on the
case. We have a population of fifty millions in the country.
We have a food supply which will last, with my additions to
it, for perhaps fourteen weeks. Beyond that we have
nothing in hand. The next supply cannot make its appearance
for at least a year. I have omitted the yield of the
present crop, as I wish to be on the safe side; and I find
that most of the grain is useless. When the new crop comes
in, it will be, under present conditions, negligible in quantity
owing to the soil-destruction which the <i>Bacillus diazotans</i>
has wrought. That, I think, is a fair statement of the case
as it stands.</p>
<p>“What results can we look for? If we ration the nation,
even if we allow only a quarter of the normal supplies per
day, our whole stock will be exhausted within the year.
There will be a large percentage of deaths owing to underfeeding;
but at the end of the year I think we might look
forward to having a debilitated population of some thirty
millions to feed. Will the new crop give us food for them?
I have consulted men who know the subject and they tell
me that it is an impossibility. We could not raise food
enough, under the present conditions, to support even a
reasonable percentage of that population.”</p>
<p>He paused again, as though to let this sink in also.</p>
<p>“Gentlemen, this nation stands at the edge of its grave.
That is the simple truth.”</p>
<p>We had all seen the trend of his reasoning; but this cold
statement sent a shiver through the meeting. When he
spoke again, it was in an even graver tone.</p>
<p>“You must admit, gentlemen, that we cannot hope to
keep alive even half of the population until crops become
plentiful once more. There is only a single choice before
us. Either we distribute the available food uniformly
throughout the country or we take upon ourselves the
responsibility of an unequal allotment. If we choose the
first course, all of us will die without reprieve. It is not a
matter of sentiment; it is the plain logic of figures. No
safety lies in that course. What about the second?</p>
<p>“Let us assume that we choose the alternative. We
select from the fifty millions of our population those whom
we regard as most fitted to survive. We lay aside from our
stores sufficient to support this fraction; and we distribute
among the remainder of the people the residuum of our food.
If they can survive on that scale of rations, well and good.
If not, we cannot turn aside the course of Nature.”</p>
<p>The Prime Minister looked up. Evidently, behind his
impassive mask, he had been following the reasoning.</p>
<p>“If I understand you aright,” he said, “you are proposing
to murder a large proportion of the population by slow
starvation?”</p>
<p>“No. What I am trying to do is to save some millions
of them from a certain death. It just depends upon which
way you look at it, Biles. But have it your own way if it
pleases you.</p>
<p>“Now, gentlemen, the calculation is a simple one. We
have enough food to last a population of fifty millions for
fourteen weeks. From that we deduct five weeks’ supplies
for the whole population; which leaves us with four
hundred and fifty million weekly rations. We select five
million people whom we decide must survive; and these
four hundred and fifty million rations will keep them fed for
ninety weeks—say a year and nine months. It will really
be longer than that; for I anticipate rather heavy ravages
of disease on account of the monotony of the diet and the
lack of fresh vegetables. That is in the nature of things;
and we cannot evade it.</p>
<p>“That then, is the only alternative. It is, as the Prime
Minister has said, a death sentence on by far the greater
part of the people in these islands; but I see no way out of
the difficulties in which we are involved. It is not we who
have passed that sentence. Nature has done it; and all
that we can achieve is the rescue of a certain number of the
victims. With your help, I propose to undertake that work
of rescue.”</p>
<p>I doubt if those sitting round the table had more than the
vaguest glimpse of what all this meant. When a death-roll
reaches high figures, the mind refuses to grasp its implications.
Very few people have any concrete idea of what the
words “one million” stand for. We only understood that
there was impending a human catastrophe on a scale which
dwarfed all preceding tragedies. Beyond that, I know that
I, for one, could not force my mind.</p>
<p>“We are thus left with five million survivors,” Nordenholt
continued. “But this does not reach the crux of the
matter. The nitrogen of the soil has vanished; and it
must be replaced if the earth is ever again to bring forth
fruits. That task devolves upon mankind, for Nature
works too slowly for our purposes. In order to feed these
five million mouths—or what is left of them when the
food supply runs out—we have to raise crops next year;
and to raise these crops we must supply the soil with the
necessary nitrogenous material.</p>
<p>“I have consulted men who know”—this seemed to be
his only phrase when he referred to his authorities—“and
they tell me that it can be done if we bend our whole
energies to the task. All the methods of using the nitrogen
of the air have been worked out in detail long ago: the
Birkeland-Eyde process, Serpek’s method, the Schönherr
and the Haber-Le Rossignol processes, as well as nitrolim
manufacture and so forth. We have only to set up enough
machinery and work hard—very hard—and we shall be
able to produce by chemical processes the material which
we require. That is what the five million will have to
do. There will be no idlers among them. At first it will
be work in the dark, for we cannot calculate how much
material we require until the agricultural experts have made
their experiments upon the soil. But I understand that it
is quite within the bounds of possibility that we shall be
successful.</p>
<p>“I come now to another point. These five million
survivors cannot be scattered up and down the country.
They must be brought into a definite area, for two reasons.
In the first place, we must have them under our control so
that we can make food-distribution simple; and, in the
second place, we must be able to protect them from attack.
Remember, outside this area there will be millions dying of
starvation, and these millions will be desperate. We can
take no risks.”</p>
<p>He took a roll from behind his chair and unfolded upon
the table a large map of the British Isles marked with
patches of colour.</p>
<p>“As to the choice of a segregation area, we are limited
by various factors. We shall need coal for the basis of our
work; therefore it would suit us best to place our colony
near one of the coal-fields. We shall need iron for our
new machinery; and it would be best to choose some centre
in which foundries are already numerous. We shall need
to house our five million survivors and we cannot spend
time in building new cities for them. And, finally, we
need a huge water-supply for that population. On this
map, I have had these various factors marked in colour.
In some places, as you see, three of the desiderata are
co-existent; but there is only one region in which we find
all four conditions satisfied—in the Clyde Valley. There
you have coal and iron; there are already in existence
enormous numbers of foundries and machine-shops; the
city of Glasgow alone is capable of accommodating over
a million human beings; and the water-supply is ample.
This, I think, is sufficient to direct our choice to that
spot.</p>
<p>“There are two further reasons why I am in favour of
the Clyde Valley. It is a defensible position, for one thing.
North of it you have only a very limited population—some
three millions or even less. On the south, it is far removed
from the main centres of population in the Midlands and
London. This will be an advantage later on. Again,
second point, we have to look forward to cultivation next
year. Bordering the Clyde Valley, within easy reach, lie
the tracts which, before the Blight, used to be the most
fertile land in the country. The fields are ready for us
to sow, once we have replaced the vanished nitrogen. I
think there is no better place which we could select.</p>
<p>“Now, gentlemen, I have put my scheme before you.
I have not given you more than the outlines of it. I know
that it seems visionary at first; but you must either take it
or leave it. We cannot wait for Parliament or for anybody
else. The thing must be done now. Will you help?”</p>
<p>A murmur of assent passed round the table. Even the
Prime Minister joined in the common approval; and I saw
Nordenholt thank him with a glance.</p>
<p>“Very good, gentlemen. I have most of the preliminaries
worked out in sufficient detail to let us get ahead. To-morrow
we meet again here at nine in the morning, and
by that time I hope to have further information for each of
you. In the meantime, will you be good enough to think
over the points at which this scheme will touch your own
special branches of industry? We have an immense amount
of improvisation before us; and we must be ready for things
as they come. Thank you.”</p>
<p>He seated himself; and for the first time I realised what
he had done. By sheer force of personality and a clear
mind, he had carried us along with him and secured our
assent to a scheme which, wild-cat though it might appear,
seemed to be the only possible way out of the crisis. He
had constituted himself a kind of Dictator, though without
any of the trappings of the office; and no one had dared to
oppose him. The cold brutality with which he had treated
the politicians was apparently justified; for I now saw
whither their procrastination would have led us. But I
must confess that I was dazed by the rapidity with which
his moves had been made. Possibly in my account I have
failed to reproduce the exact series of transitions by which
he passed from stage to stage. I was too intent at the time
to take clear mental notes of what occurred; but I believe
that I have at least drawn a picture which comes near to the
reality.</p>
<p>The meeting was at its end. Nordenholt went across to
speak to the Prime Minister; while the others began to
leave the room in groups of two and three. I moved
towards the door, when Nordenholt looked up and caught
my eye.</p>
<p>“Just wait a minute, Flint, please.”</p>
<p>He continued his earnest talk with the Premier for a few
minutes, then handed over an envelope containing a bulky
mass of papers. At last he came to me and we went out
together.</p>
<p>“You might come round to my place for a short time,
Flint,” he said. “My car is waiting for us. I want you
to be one of my right-hand men in this business and there
are some things I wish to explain to you now. It may not
seem altogether relevant to you; but I think it is necessary
if we are to work together well.”</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 class="nobreak"><small>CHAPTER VI</small><br/>


The Psychology of the Breaking-strain</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">With</span> my entry into Nordenholt’s house I hoped to
gain a clearer insight into certain sides of his character; for
the possessions which a man accumulates about him serve
as an index to his mind even when his reticence gives no
clue to his nature. I had expected something uncommon,
from what I had already seen of him; but my forecasts were
entirely different from the reality.</p>
<p>The room into which he ushered me was spacious and
high-ceilinged; a heavy carpet, into the pile of which my
feet sank, covered the floor; a few arm-chairs were scattered
here and there; and a closed roll-top desk stood in a corner.
One entire side of the room was occupied by bookshelves.
Beyond this, there was nothing. It was the simplest
furnishing I had ever seen; and in the house of a multi-millionaire
it astonished me. I had somehow expected to
find lavishness in some form: art in one or other of its
interpretations, or at any rate an indication of Nordenholt’s
tastes. But this room defeated me by its very plainness.
There appeared to be no starting-point for an analysis. To
me it seemed a place where a man could think without
distraction; and then, at the desk, put his thoughts into
practical application.</p>
<p>As we entered, Nordenholt excused himself for a moment.
He wished to give instructions to his secretary. Some
telephoning had to be done at once; and then he would
be at my disposal. I heard him go into the next room.</p>
<p>When I am left alone in a strange house with nothing
to fill in my time, I gravitate naturally to the bookcases;
so that now I mechanically moved over to the serried rows
of shelves which lined one side of the room. Here at last
I might get some clue to the workings of Nordenholt’s
mind. Glancing along the backs of the volumes, I found
that the first shelf contained only works on metaphysics and
psychology. Somewhat puzzled by this selection, I passed
from tier to tier, and still no other subject came in view.
A rapid examination of the cases from end to end showed
me that the entire library dealt with this single theme, the
main bulk of the works being psychological.</p>
<p>This discovery overturned in my mind several nebulous
conjectures which I had begun to form as to Nordenholt’s
character. What sort of a man was this, a millionaire,
reputed to be one of the shrewdest financiers of the day,
who stocked his study entirely with psychological works
among which not a single financial book of reference was
to be found? Coupled with the stark simplicity of the
furniture, this clue seemed unlikely to lead me far.</p>
<p>As I was pondering, the door opened and Nordenholt
returned. While it was still ajar, I heard the trill of a
telephone bell and a girl’s voice giving a number; then the
door closed and cut off further sounds. Thus after ten
minutes in his house I had gathered only three things about
him: he was simple, almost Spartan, in his tastes; he was
interested in psychology; and his secretary was a girl and
not a man.</p>
<p>He came forward towards me; and again I had the
sensation of command in his appearance. His great height
and easy movements may have accounted for it in part; but
I am taller than the average myself; so that it was not
entirely this. Even now I cannot analyse the feeling
which he produced, not on myself alone, but upon all those
with whom he came in contact. Personal magnetism may
satisfy some people as an explanation; but what is personal
magnetism but a name? In some inexplicable manner,
Nordenholt gave the impression of a vast reservoir of pent-up
force, seldom unloosed but ever ready to spring into action
if required; and in these unfathomable eyes there seemed
to brood an uncanny and yet not entirely unsympathetic
perception which chilled me with its aloofness and nevertheless
drew me to him in some way which is not clear to
me even now. Under that slow and minute inspection, eye
to eye, I felt all my human littleness, all my petty weaknesses
exposed and weighed; but I felt also that behind this
unrelenting scrutiny there was a depth of understanding
which struck an even balance and saved me from contempt.
I can put it no better than that.</p>
<p>He motioned me to a chair and took another himself.
For a few moments he remained silent; and when he spoke
I was struck by the change in his tone. At the meeting,
he had spoken decisively, almost bitterly at times; but now
a ring of sadness entered into that great musical voice.</p>
<p>“I wonder, Flint,” he said, “I wonder if you understand
what we have taken in hand to-day? I doubt if any
of us see where all this is leading us. I see the vague
outlines of it before us; but beyond a certain point one
cannot go.”</p>
<p>He paused, deep in thought for a few seconds; then, as
though waking suddenly to life again, offered me a cigar
and took one himself. When he spoke again, it was in a
different tone.</p>
<p>“Perhaps you wonder why I picked you out—of course
it was I who got you invited to that meeting; I wanted
to look you over there before making up my mind about
you. Well, I have means of knowing about people; and
you struck me as the man I needed in this work. I’ve
been watching you for some years, Flint; ever since you
made your mark, in fact. You aren’t one of my young
men—the ones they call ‘Nordenholt’s gang,’ I believe—but
you are of my kind; and I knew that I could get you
if I wanted you for something big.”</p>
<p>In any other man this would have struck me as insolence;
but Nordenholt had already established such an influence
over me that I felt flattered rather than ruffled by this calm
assumption on his part.</p>
<p>“But in some ways it’s a disadvantage now that we didn’t
come together earlier,” he continued. “You remember
Nelson and his captains—the band of brothers? Nothing
can be accomplished on a grand scale without that feeling;
and possibly I have left it until too late to get into touch
with you. It depends on yourself, Flint. I know you,
possibly as well as you know yourself; but you know
nothing of me. With my young men,” and a tinge of
pride came into his voice, “with my young men, that difficulty
doesn’t arise. They know me as well as anyone can—well
enough, at any rate, for us to work together for a
common object, no matter how big the stake may be. But
you, Flint, represent a foreign mind in the machine. I want
you to understand some things; in fact, it’s essential that
you should see the lines on which I work; for otherwise
we shall be at cross-purposes. I wonder how it can be
done?”</p>
<p>He leaned back in his chair and smoked silently for a
few minutes. I said nothing; for I was quite content to
await whatever he had to put into words. I only wondered
what form it would take. When he broke the silence, it
was on quite unexpected lines. He looked at his watch.</p>
<p>“Three hours yet before we can do anything further.
I might as well spend part of it on this; and possibly I can
give you an idea of my outlook on things which will help
you when we are working together up North.</p>
<p>“When I was quite a child, Flint, I used to take a certain
delight in doing things which had an element of risk in
them—physical risk, I mean. I liked to climb difficult trees,
to work my way out on to dangerous bits of roof, to walk
across tree-trunks spanning streams, and so forth. There’s
that element of risk at the back of all real enjoyment, to
my mind. It needn’t be physical risk necessarily, though
there you have it in perhaps its most acute aspect; but at
the root of a gamble of any sort where the stakes are high
you find this factor lying, whether it is noticeable or not.</p>
<p>“One of my earliest experiences in that direction took
the form of walking along a slippery wall which was high
enough to make a fall from it a serious matter. I mastered
the art of keeping on the wall to perfection; and then,
finding that pall upon me, I endeavoured to complicate it
by jumping across the gap made by a gateway. It was an
easy distance: I proved that to myself by practising on the
ground from a standing take-off. And the nature of the
wall offered no particular difficulty, for I tested myself in
jumping a similar gap between two slippery tree-trunks laid
end to end. Yet when I came to the actual gap in the
wall, my muscles simply refused to obey me; and time after
time I drew back involuntarily from the spring.</p>
<p>“I was an introspective child; and this puzzled me.
I knew that I could accomplish the feat with ease; and yet
something prevented my attempting it. I fell to analysing
my sensations and tracing down the various factors in the
case; and, of course, it was not long until I came to the
crucial point. Does this bore you? I am sorry if it does,
but you’ll see the point of it by-and-by.”</p>
<p>While he had been speaking, I had had a most curious
impression. His argument, whatever it might be, was
evidently addressed to me; and yet all through it I had
the feeling that it was not altogether to me that he was
talking. In some way I gathered the idea that while he
spoke to me his mind was working upon another line, testing
and re-testing some chain of reasoning which was illustrated
by his anecdote; so that while I looked upon one aspect of
it he was scanning the same facts from a totally different
point of view and reading into them something which I was
not intended to grasp.</p>
<p>“Obviously the crux of the matter was the height of the
wall and the fear of hurting myself severely if I missed my
leap,” he continued. “Once I had discovered that—and
of course it took much less time to do so than it takes now
to explain the case—I set about another trial. I made up
my mind that I would think nothing of the chance of slipping,
and that this time I would accomplish the feat with
ease. Yet once more I failed to bring my body up to the
effort. Something stronger than my consciousness was at
work; and it defeated me.”</p>
<p>He smiled sardonically at some memory or other.</p>
<p>“I practised jumping along a marked portion of the wall
where it was lower; and I found that I could accomplish
the distance with ease. Whereupon my childish mind
formulated the problem in this way; and I believe that it
was correct in doing so. The ultimate factor in the thing
was the fear of a damaging fall. Within limits, I was
prepared to take the risk; as had been shown by the success
on the lower parts of the wall. But at the high place beside
the gateway, my resolution had given way under a strain of
nervousness. And at once there came into my mind the
conception of a breaking-strain. Up to a certain tension,
my conscious mind worked perfectly; but, beyond that,
there was a complete collapse. Something had snapped
under the strain. I may say that I finally accomplished the
leap successfully; I simply wouldn’t allow myself to be
beaten in a thing I knew I could do.”</p>
<p>He halted for a moment as though this marked a turning-point
in his thoughts.</p>
<p>“This idea of the breaking-strain remained fixed in my
child’s mind, however; and I used to amuse myself by
conjecturing all sorts of hypothetical cases in which it played
a part. It finally grew to be a sort of mild obsession
with me, and I would ask myself continually: “Why did
So-and-so do this rather than that?” and would then set to
work to discover the factors at the back of his actions and
the tension-snap which had driven him into something which
was unexpected from his normal line of conduct.</p>
<p>“You can understand, Flint, how this practice grew
upon me. It is the most interesting thing in the world;
and the materials for applying it are everywhere about us
in our everyday life. I extracted endless amusement from
it; and as I grew up into boyhood I found its fascination
greater than ever. I took a never-failing interest in probing
at the hidden springs of conduct and trying to establish
these breaking-strains in the people before me.</p>
<p>“Then, as I grew older I discovered the Law Courts.
There you see the philosophy of the breaking-strain brought
into touch with real life in a practical form. I used to go
and watch some well-known barrister handling a hostile
witness; and suddenly I understood that all these men
were merely fumbling empirically after the thing that I had
studied from my earliest days. What does a barrister want
to do with a hostile witness? To break him down, to
throw him out of his normal line of thought and then to
fish among the dislocated machinery for something which
suits his own case. It afforded me endless interest to follow
the methods of each different cross-examiner. I learned a
great deal in the Courts; and I came away from them
convinced that I had found something of more than mere
academic interest. This breaking-strain question was one
which could be applied to affairs of the greatest practical
importance. It was actually so applied in law cases.
Why not utilise it in other directions also?”</p>
<p>I found him watching me keenly to see if I followed
his line of thought. After a moment, he went on:</p>
<p>“It sounds so obvious now, Flint; but I believe that I
alone saw it as a scientific problem. Your blackmailer,
your poker-sharp, all those types of mind had been working
on the thing in a crude way; but to me it appeared from
a different angle. Everyone else had looked on it in the
form of special cases, particular men who had to be swayed
by particular motives. I began as a youth where they left
off. I spent some years on it, Flint, examining it in all its
bearings; and finally I evolved a system of classification
which enabled me to approach any specific case along
general lines. I can’t go into that now; but it suddenly
gave me an insight into motives and actions such as I doubt
if anyone ever had before.”</p>
<p>He paused and watched the smoke curling up from his
cigar. Again he seemed to be deep in the consideration of
some problem connected with and yet alien to what he
had been saying. For a time he was lost in thought; and
I waited to hear the rest of the story.</p>
<p>“Well, Flint,” he went on at last, “it certainly seemed
on the face of it to be a very useless accomplishment from
the practical point of view; from the standpoint of mere
cash, I mean. And yet, it still fascinated me. When I
was quite a young man I determined to go to Canada and
take up lumber. I was an orphan; there was nothing to
keep me in this country, for I had no near relations; and
I felt that it might do me good to cut loose from things
here and go away into the woods for a time. I had enough
capital to start in a small way; so I went. My ideas of the
lumber-trade were vague at the time. If I had known
what it was, I doubt if I should have touched it.</p>
<p>“At first sight, it looked a hopeless venture. I knew
nothing of the trade; I was a youngster then; I’d had
no training in financial operations. Failure seemed to be
the only outcome; and the men on the spot laughed at me.
I simply would not admit that I was beaten at the start;
and everything drove me on against my better judgment.
And I had one tremendous asset. I knew men.</p>
<p>“I knew men better than anyone else out there. I
never made a mistake in my choice. I collected a few
good men at the start to help me; and through them I
gathered others almost as good. In a year I had made
progress; in two years I was a success; and very soon I
became somebody to reckon with. And through it all,
Flint, I knew practically nothing about the actual trade.
That was only a tool in my hands. What I dealt in was
men and men’s minds. I could gauge a man’s capacity to
a hair; and I picked my managers and foremen from the
very best. They were glad to come to me, somehow.
They felt I understood them; and no inefficients were comfortable
with me. I never had to discharge them; they
simply went of their own accord. I left everything to my
staff, for I knew them thoroughly and gauged their capacities
to a degree. And because I knew them I found the
right place for each man; so that the work went forward
with perfect smoothness and efficiency. Before I had
been five years there I was on the road to being a rich
man.”</p>
<p>His tone expressed no satisfaction. It was clear that I
was not expected to admire his talents.</p>
<p>“Then, suddenly, came the discovery of platinum on a
large scale in the neighbourhood of my district. You know
what that meant; but you must remember that in those
days it was a very different matter from now. It was like
the Yukon gold rush in some of its aspects. The place
swarmed with prospectors, mostly men of no education,
whose main object was to get as much as they could in
a hurry and then go elsewhere to spend the money the
platinum brought them. Meanwhile, the platinum market
was convulsed, and the price swayed to and fro from day
to day. You must remember that in those times the thing
was in the hands of a very few men; for the supply
was limited. The Canadian mines overthrew the nicely-adjusted
balance of the market and everything suffered in
consequence; for the uses of platinum directly or indirectly
spread over a very large field of human industry.”</p>
<p>That part of his history was more or less familiar to me,
but I did not interrupt.</p>
<p>“One day it occurred to me that here in Canada we had
a case parallel to the state of affairs in the Diamond Fields
before the Kimberley amalgamation. Why not repeat
Cecil Rhodes’ methods? Just as he regulated the price
of diamonds, I could regulate the price of platinum if I
could get control of the Canadian mines, for they were by
far the most important in the world.</p>
<p>“Again, I knew nothing of platinum, just as I had
known nothing of lumber; but I was able to pay for the
best advice, to pay for secrecy as well; and to judge the
experts, I had my knowledge of men to help me. I got
the best men, I chose only men whom my insight enabled
me to pick out; and I began to buy up claims quietly
under their guidance. Here again psychology came in. I
could tell at a glance when a man was a “quitter” and
when a miner would refuse to sell. I could gauge almost
to a sovereign the price that would prove the breaking-strain
for any particular owner. I can’t tell you how it
is done; it is partly inborn, perhaps, partly acquired; but
I know that my knowledge is quite incommunicable.</p>
<p>“To make a long story short, I had acquired a very fair
percentage of the valuable ground when suddenly I discovered
that five other men had been struck with the same
idea; and that prices were rising beyond anything I could
hope to pay. It was a case for amalgamation; but I did
not see my way through it quite so simply. Two of them
I knew to be honest. One of them I could not trust,
although he had hitherto never shown any signs of crookedness;
but I knew his breaking-strain, and I knew also that
the temptations to which he would be exposed under any
amalgamation scheme would be too great for him. He had
to be eliminated. The other two were weak men who
could be dealt with easily enough. I needn’t give you the
details. I approached the two honest men, combined with
them, and with the joint capital of the three of us I bought
out the third competitor. The other two we dealt with
separately, buying out the one and taking the other in along
with us. My partners trusted me with the negotiations,
again because I knew men and their motives.</p>
<p>“And that was how I made my first million. Remember,
I knew nothing about the materials I had handled in
the making of it. I never took the slightest interest in
the things themselves—and I took very little interest in the
money either, for my tastes are simple. What did interest
me was the psychology of the thing, the probing among the
springs and levers of men’s minds, and the working out of
all the complex strains and stresses which form the background
of our reason and our emotions. The million was
a mere by-product of the process.</p>
<p>“But with the million there came another interest. Up
to that time I had applied my methods to individual cases;
but it struck me, after the strain of the amalgamation
negotiations was over, that my generalisations were capable
of a wider application. I took up the study of political
affairs over here; and I found that my principles enabled
me to gauge the psychology of masses even more easily than
those of individuals. As a practical test, I stood for Parliament;
and got elected without any difficulty. Of course
one of the Parties was glad to have me—a millionaire isn’t
likely to go a-begging at their door for long—but you may
remember that I won that election by my own methods.
The Party machines tried to copy them, of course, at a
later date; but they failed hopelessly because they were
merely repeating mechanically some operations which I had
designed for a special case.</p>
<p>“I took very little interest in politics, though. I had no
sympathy with the usual methods of the politicians; and at
times I revolted against them effectually.”</p>
<p>He was evidently thinking of the two episodes which had
gained him the nickname of the Wrecker.</p>
<p>“When I began, I think I told you that the element of
risk enters largely into one’s pleasures; and I believe that
holds good in politics. The work of a politician, and
especially of a Cabinet Minister, is largely in the nature
of a gamble. To most of them, politics is an empirical
science; for they have little time to study the basis of it.
I’ll do them the justice to say that I don’t think it is
a mere matter of clinging to their salaries which keeps
them in office; it’s mainly that they enjoy the feeling of
swaying great events. With an Empire like ours, the
stakes are tremendous; and there’s a certain sensation to
be got out of gambling on that scale. Mind you, I doubt
if they realise themselves that this is what they enjoy in the
political game; but it is actually what does sway them to
a great extent.</p>
<p>“Now so long as it’s a mere question of some parochial
point, I don’t mind their enjoying their sensations. It
matters very little in the long run whether one Bill or
another passes Parliament; and if they fight over minor
questions, I don’t care. But twice in my political career
I saw that the Party game was threatening trouble on
bigger lines. The Anglo-Peruvian agreement and the
Malotu Islands question were affairs that cut down to the
bed-rock of things; and I couldn’t stand aside and see
them muddled in the usual way. I had to assert myself
there, whether I liked it or not. And when I did intervene,
my mental equipment made the result a certainty. <i>I</i>
knew the country and the country’s average opinion in a
way that none of them did; and I had only to strike at the
vital point. They call me the Wrecker; and I suppose I
did bring down two Governments on these questions; but
it wasn’t so difficult for me.</p>
<p>“But, as I told you, I never had much interest in politics.
I like real things; and the political game is more than half
make-believe. I still have my seat in the House; but I
think they are gladdest when I am not there.</p>
<p>“Well, I am afraid I’m making a long story of it; but I
think you will see the drift of it now. Politics failed to give
me what I wanted. I had no turn for the routine of it;
and I had no wish to be involved in all the petty manœuvres
upon which the nursing of a majority depends. Mind you,
I could have done it better than any of them, with that
peculiar bent of mine. They consult me whenever a crisis
arises; and I can generally pull them through. After all,
it’s a case of handling men, there as everywhere else.</p>
<p>“However, I wanted something better to amuse me than
the squaring of some nonentity with a knighthood or the
pacification of some indignant office-seeker who had been
passed over. I wanted to feel myself pitted against men
who really were experts in their own line. And that was
how I came to take up finance in earnest.”</p>
<p>He paused again and lighted a fresh cigar. While he
was doing so, I watched his face. In any other man, his
autobiographic sketch would have seemed egotistical; and
possibly I have raised that impression in my reproduction of
it; for I can only give the sense of what he said. I cannot
put on paper the tones of his voice—the faint tinge of
contempt with which he spoke of his triumphs, as though
they were child’s play. Nor can I do more than indicate
here and there that peculiar sensation of duality which his
talk took on more and more clearly as he proceeded. It
was as though the Nordenholt whom I saw before me were
telling his story whilst over behind him stood some greater
personality, following the narrative and tracing out in it the
clues which were to lead on to some events still in the
distant future.</p>
<p>“Finance, Flint,” he continued. “That was the field
where I came into my own at last. Money in itself is
nothing, nothing whatever. But the making of money, the
duel of brain against brain with not even the counters on
the table, that’s the great game. The higher branches of
finance are simply a combination of arithmetic and
psychology. They’re divorced absolutely from any idea of
material gain or loss. Railways, steamship lines, coal, oil,
wheat, cotton or wool—do you imagine that one thinks of
these concrete things while one plays the game? Not at
all. They are the merest pawns. The whole affair is
compressed into groups of figures and the glimpses of the
other man’s brain which one gets here and there throughout
the operations. And I played a straight game, Flint; no
small investor was ever ruined through my manœuvres. I
doubt if any other financier can say as much. I went into
the thing as a game, a big, risky game for my own hand;
and I refused to gamble in the savings of little men. I took
my gains from the big men who opposed me, not from the
swarm of innocents.”</p>
<p>It was true, I remembered. Nordenholt had played the
game of finance in a way never seen before. He had made
many men’s fortunes—a by-product, as he would have said,
no doubt—but no one had ever gone into the arena unwarned
by him. When he had laid his plans, carried out his
preliminary moves and was ready to strike, a full-page
advertisement had appeared in every newspaper in the
country. “<span class="smcap">Mr. Nordenholt advises the small Investor
to Refrain from Operating in Wheat</span>,” or whatever
it might be that he proposed to deal in himself. Then,
after giving time for this to take effect, he struck his first
blow. Wonderful struggles these were, fought out often
far in the depths of that strange sea of finance, so that hardly
a ripple came to the surface. Often, too, the agitation
reached the upper waters and there would be glimpses of
the two vast organisations convulsed by their efforts; here a
mass of foam only, there some strange tentacle stretching
out to reach its prey or to coil itself around a vantage-point
which it could use as a fulcrum in further exertions. During
this period, the Exchanges of the world would be shaken,
there would be failures, hammerings, ruin for those who had
ventured into the contest despite the warnings. Then,
suddenly, the cascading waves would be stilled. One of the
antagonists had gone under.</p>
<p>A fresh advertisement would appear: “<span class="smcap">Mr. Nordenholt
has ceased his Operations</span>.” It was a strange requiem
over the grave of some king of finance. Nordenholt was
always victorious. And with the collapse of his opponent,
the small speculators flocked into the markets of the world
and completed the downfall.</p>
<p>Finally, after the gains had been counted, he advertised
again asking all those who had involuntarily suffered by his
contest to submit their claims to him; and every genuine
case was paid in full. He could afford it, no doubt; but
how many would have done it? I knew from that move of
his that he really spoke the truth when he said that money
in itself was nothing to him. And it perhaps illustrates as
well as anything the impression he produced upon my mind
that afternoon. On the one side he was cold, calculating,
pitiless to those whom he regarded as his enemies and the
enemies of the smaller investor; on the other, he was full
of understanding and compassion for those whom he had
maimed in the course of his gigantic operations. The
Wheat Trust, the Cotton Combine, Consolidated Industries,
the Steel Magnates, and the Associated Railways, all had
gone down before him; and he had ground their leaders
into the very dust. And in every case, he had opened his
campaign as soon as they had shown signs of using their
power to oppress the common people. It may have been
merely a move in his psychological strategy; he may have
waited until the man in the street had begun to be uneasy
for the future, so that this great intangible mass of opinion
was enlisted on his side. But I prefer to think otherwise:
and I was associated with Nordenholt in the end as closely
as any man. No one ever knew him, no one ever fathomed
that personality—of that I am certain. He was always a
riddle. But I believe that his cool intelligence, his merciless
tactics, all had behind them a depth of understanding and a
sympathy with the helpless minority. I know this is almost
incredible in face of his record; but I am convinced of its
truth.</p>
<p>“At the end of it all,” he went on, “I can look back and
say that my theories were justified. I knew nothing of
finance; but I chose my advisers well. I knew what my
opponents relied upon and what they regarded as points
which could be given up without affecting their general
position. The rest was simply a matter of psychology.
How could I bring the breaking-strain to bear?</p>
<p>“Well, when I left it, the financial world had handed
over to me a fortune which, I suppose, has seldom been
equalled. There was nothing in it, you know, Flint,
nothing whatever. It merely happened that I was trained
in a way different from everyone else. They were plotting
and scheming with shares and stocks and debentures, skying
this one, depressing that one and keeping their attention
fixed on the Exchanges. I came to the thing from a
different angle. The movements of the markets meant
little to me in comparison with the workings of the brains
behind those markets. I could foresee the line of their
advance; and I knew how to take them in the flank at the
right moment. I fought them on ground they could not
understand. They knew the mind of the small investor
thoroughly, for they had fleeced him again and again. I
began by clearing the small speculator off the board; and
thus they were deprived of their trump card. They had
to fight me instead of ruining him; and they had no idea
what I was. It was incredibly simple, when you think of
it. That is why you never found anything about my
personality in the newspapers. I paid them to leave me
alone. No one knew me; and I was able to fight in the
dark.</p>
<p>“But when I grew tired of it at last, I had an enormous
fortune. What was I to do with it? Money in itself one
can do nothing with. If I were put to it, I doubt if I
could spend £5,000 a year and honestly say that I had got
value for it—I mean direct personal enjoyment. I cast about
for some use to which I could turn this enormous mass of
wealth. You may smile, Flint, but it is one of the most
difficult problems I ever took up. I hate waste; and I
wanted to see some direct, practical value for all these
accumulated millions. What was I to do?</p>
<p>“I looked back on the work of some of my predecessors.
Carnegie used to spend his money on libraries; but do
libraries yield one any intimate satisfaction? Can one
really say that they would give one a feeling that one’s
money had been spent to a good purpose? Apparently they
did to him; but that sort of thing wouldn’t appeal to me.
Then there is art. Pierpont Morgan amassed a huge
collection; but there again I don’t feel on safe ground. Is
one’s money merely to go in accumulating painted canvas
for the elect to pore over? The man in the street cannot
appreciate these things even if he could see them. I gave
up that idea.</p>
<p>“Then I came across a life of Cecil Rhodes and he
seemed to be more akin to me in some ways. Empire
building is a big thing and, if you believe in Empires, it’s
a good thing. There is something satisfactory in knowing
that you are preparing the way for future generations, laying
the foundations in the desert and awaiting the tramp of
those far-off generations which will throng the streets of the
unbuilt cities. A great dream, Flint. One needs a prospicience
and a fund of hope to deal in things like that.
But I want to see results in my own day; I want to be
sure that I’m on the right lines and not merely rearing a
dream-fabric which will fade out and pass away long before
it has its chance of materialisation. I want something
which I can see in action now and yet something which
will go down from generation to generation.</p>
<p>“I thought long over it, Flint. Time and again I seemed
to glimpse what I wanted; and yet it eluded me. Then,
suddenly, I realised that I had the very thing at my gates.
Youth.</p>
<p>“All over the world there are youngsters growing up
who will be stifled in their development by mere financial
troubles. They have the brains and the character to make
good in time; but at what a cost! All their best energy
goes in fulfilling the requirements of our social system,
getting a roof over their heads, climbing the ladder step by
step, waiting for dead men’s shoes. Then, when they come
to their own, more often than not their heart’s desire has
withered. I don’t mean that they are failures; but they
have used up their powers in overcoming those minor
difficulties which beset us all. It was an essay of Huxley’s
that brought the thing clearly before me. ‘If the nation
could purchase a potential Watt, or Davy, or Faraday, at
the cost of £100,000 down,’ he said, ‘he would be dirt-cheap
at the money.’ And with that, in a flash, I saw my
way clear. I would go about in search of these potential
leaders among our youth. My peculiar insight would suffice
to keep me on the right lines there. I would make the
way easy for them, but not too easy. I would test and
re-test them till I was sure of them. And then I would
give them all that they desired and open up the world to
them to work out their destinies.</p>
<p>“I did it in time. Even now I’m only at the beginning
of the experiment, but already I feel that I have spent my
money well. I have given a push to things; and although
I can see no further than this generation, I know that I
have opened a road for the next. Each of them is a centre
for others to congregate around and so the thing spreads like
the circles in a pool. I have thrown in the stone; but long
after I am gone the waves will be beating outward and
breaking upon unknown shores....”</p>
<p>He paused and seemed to fall into a day-dream for a few
moments. Then he spoke again.</p>
<p>“That was the origin of my young men, Flint; the
Nordenholt gang”—he sneered perceptibly at the words.
“Many of them have gone down in the race. One cannot
foresee everything, you know, try as one may. But the
residuum are a picked lot. They are scattered throughout
all the industries and professions of the Empire; and all of
them are far up in their own pursuits. I often wondered
whether anything would come of it in my day beyond
individual successes; but now I see a culmination before me.
We shall all go up side by side to Armageddon and my own
men will be with me in this struggle against the darkness.
Man never put his hand to a bigger task than this in front
of us; and I shall need my young men to help me. If we
fail, the Earth falls back beyond the Eolithic Age once more
and Man has lived in vain.”</p>
<p>His voice had risen with pride as he spoke of his
helpers; but at the close I heard again the sub-current
of sadness come into the deep tones. I had been jarred
by his exposition at the meeting, by his apparent callousness
in outlook; but now I thought I saw behind the
mask.</p>
<p>Again he sat pondering for some moments; but at last
he threw off his preoccupation; and when he spoke it was
more directly to me than hitherto.</p>
<p>“Possibly you may wonder, Flint, why it is that with
all these resources in my hands I have come to you for
help; and why I have never approached you before. The
fact is, I watched you from your start and stood by to help
you if you needed me; but you made good alone, and I
never interfere with a man unless it is absolutely necessary.
You made good without my assistance; and I thought too
well of you to offer any. But I watched you, as I said—I
have my own ways of getting information—and I knew
that you were just the man I required for a particular section
of the work in front of us. Your factory organisation showed
me that. There will be an enormous task before you; but
I know that you’ll be the right man in the right place.
I never make a mistake, when it is a case of this kind. You
aren’t an untried man.”</p>
<p>From anyone else, I would have regarded this as clumsy
flattery; but so great an influence had Nordenholt acquired
over me even in that single afternoon that I never looked
at the matter in that light at all. His manner showed no
patronage or admiration; it seemed merely that he was
stating facts as he knew them, without caring much about
my opinion.</p>
<p>“But it seems to me,” he went on, “that I’ve talked
enough about personal affairs already. I want to try to
give you some views on the main thing in front of us.
You and I, Flint, have been born and grown up in the
midst of this civilisation; and I expect that you, like most
other people, have been oblivious of the changes which have
come about; for they have been so gradual that very few
of us have noticed them at all.</p>
<p>“When you begin low down in the scale of Creation,
you find creatures without any specialised organs. The
simplest living things are just spots of protoplasm, mere
aggregations of cells, each of which performs functions
common to them all. Then, step by step as you rise in
the scale, specialisation sets in: the cells become differentiated
from one another; and each performs a function of its own.
You get the cells of the nerves receiving and transmitting
sensation; you get cells engaged in nutrition processes;
there are other cells devoted to producing motion. And
with this specialisation you get the dawn of something
which apparently did not exist before: the structure as a
whole acquires a personality of its own, distinct from the
individualities of the cells which go to build it up.</p>
<p>“But the inverse process is also possible. When the
body as a whole suffers death, you still have a certain
period during which the cells have an existence. Hair
grows after death, for example.</p>
<p>“Now if you look at the trend of civilisation, you will
see that we are passing into a stage of specialisation. In
the Middle Ages, a man might be a celebrated artist and
yet be in the forefront of the science of his day—like
Leonardo da Vinci; but in our time you seldom find a
man who is first-class in more than one line. In the
national body, each individual citizen is a specialised cell;
and if he diverged from his normal functions he would
disorganise the machine, just as a cancer cell disorganises
the body in which it grows.</p>
<p>“But this civilisation of ours has come to the edge of
its grave. It is going to die. There is no help for it.
What I fear is that in its death-throe it may destroy even
the hope of a newer and perhaps better civilisation in the
future. It is going to starve to death; and a starving
organism is desperate. So long as it retains its present
organised and coherent life, it will be a danger to us; and
for our own safety—I mean the safety of the future generations—we
must disorganise it as soon as possible. We must
throw it back at a step, if we can, to the old unspecialised
conditions; for then it will lose its most formidable powers
and break up of itself. Did you ever read Hobbes? He
thought of the State as a great Leviathan, an artificial man
of greater strength and stature than the natural man, for
whose protection and defence it was contrived; and the soul
of this artificial creature he found in sovereignty. How can
we bring about the <i>débâcle</i> of this huge organism? That is
the problem I have been facing this afternoon.</p>
<p>“The Leviathan’s life-blood is the system of communications
throughout the country; and I doubt if we can cripple
that sufficiently rapidly and effectively to bring about the
downfall. It would take too long and excite too much
opposition if we did it thoroughly. We must have something
subtler, Flint, something which will strike at each
individual intelligence and isolate it from its fellows as far
as possible. It’s my old problem of the breaking-strain
again on the very widest scale. We must find some
psychological weapon to help us. Nothing else will do.”</p>
<p>It seemed as though he were appealing to me for suggestions;
but I had nothing to offer. I had never considered
such a problem; and at first sight it certainly seemed insoluble.
Given that men already had the certainty of death
before them, what stronger motive could one bring to bear?</p>
<p>“I must think over it further,” he said at last, “I think
I see a glimmering of some possibilities. After all, it’s my
own line.”</p>
<p>He dropped the subject and seemed to sink into his own
thoughts for a time. When he broke the silence once more,
it was on an entirely different subject.</p>
<p>“I wonder if you ever read the Norse mythology, Flint?
No? Well, you’ve missed something. The gods of
Greece were a poor lot, a kind of divine collection of
Fermiers Généreaux with much the same tastes; but the
Scandinavian divinities were in a different class. They were
human in a way; but their humanity wasn’t of the baser
sort. And over them all hung that doom of Ragnarök,
their Twilight, when the forces of Evil would be loosed
for the final struggle to bring darkness upon the earth. It’s
the strangest forecast of our present crisis. As Ragnarök
drew near, brother was to turn against brother; bloodshed
was to sweep the land. Then was to come the Winter,
three years long, when all trees were to fail and all fruits to
perish, while the race of men died by hunger and cold and
violence. And with Ragnarök the very Gods themselves
were to pass away in their struggle with all the Forces of
Evil and Darkness.</p>
<p>“But they were only half-gods, deified men. Behind
them, the All-Father stood; and beyond that time of terror
there lay the hope of Gimle, the new age when all would
again be young and fair.</p>
<p>“I look beyond these coming horrors to a new Gimle,
Flint; a time when Earth will renew her youth and we
shall shake free from all the trammels which this dying
civilisation has twined about our feet. It will come, I feel
sure. But only a few of us leaders will see it. The strain
will be too much for us; only the very toughest will
survive. But each of us must work to the very last breath
to save something upon which we can build anew. There
must be no shrinking in either will or emotion. I warn
you that it will be terrible. To save mankind from the
terror of the giants, Odin gave his eye to Mimir in return
for a draught of the Well of Knowledge. Some of us will
have to give our lives.... A few of us will lose our very
souls.... It will be worth it!”</p>
<p>I was amazed to find this train of mysticism in that cold
mind. Yet, after all, is it surprising? Almost all the great
men of history have been mystics of one kind or another.
Nordenholt rose; and something which had burned in his
eyes died out suddenly. He went to the roll-top desk and
took from it a bundle of papers.</p>
<p>“Here are your instructions, Flint. Everything has been
foreseen, I think, for the start. Follow them implicitly as
far as they go; and after that I trust you to carry out the
further steps which you will see are required.”</p>
<p>As he was shaking hands with me, another thought
seemed to strike him.</p>
<p>“By the way, of course you understand that the whole
of this scheme depends for success on our being able to
exterminate these bacilli? If we cannot do that, they will
simply attack any nitrogenous manure which we use. I am
putting my bacteriologists on to the problem at once; but
in any case the nitrogen scheme must go ahead. Without
it, no success is possible, even if we destroyed <i>B. diazotans</i>.
So go ahead.”</p>
<p>His car awaited me at the door. On the drive home, I
saw in the streets crowds gathered around hoarding after
hoarding and staring up at enormous placards which had
just been posted. The smaller type was invisible to me;
but gigantic lettering caught my eye as I passed.</p>
<div class="bbox">
<p class="center">NITROGEN<br/>
<br/>
ONE MILLION MEN WANTED<br/>
<br/>
<span class="gap"><span class="smcap">Nordenholt</span></span>
</p>
</div>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 class="nobreak"><small>CHAPTER VII</small><br/>


Nordenholt’s Million</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">Of</span> all the incidents in that afternoon, I think the sight
of these placards brought home to me most forcibly two of
the salient characteristics of Nordenholt’s many-sided mind:
his foresight and his self-reliance. Their appearance in the
streets at that moment showed that they formed part of a
plan which had been decided upon several days in advance,
since time had to be allowed for printing and distributing
them; whilst the fact that they were being posted up within
two hours of the close of the meeting proved that Nordenholt
had never had the slightest doubt of his success in dominating
the Ministers.</p>
<p>Later on, I became familiar with these posters. They
were not identical by any means; and I learned to expect
a difference in their wording according to the district in
which they were posted up. The methods of varied
personal appeal had long been familiar to the advertising
world; but I found that Nordenholt had broken away
from tradition and had staked everything upon his knowledge
of the human mind. In these advertisements his
psychological instinct was developed in an uncanny degree
which was clear enough to me, who knew the secret; but
I doubt if any man without my knowledge would have
seen through the superficial aspect of them quite so
readily.</p>
<p>In this first stage of his campaign he had to conceal his
hand. The advertisements were merely the first great net
which he spread in order to capture every man who would
be at all likely to be useful to him, while the meshes had to
be left wide enough to allow the undesirable types to slip
through. The proclamations—for they really took this
form—set forth concisely the exact danger which threatened
the food-supply of the country; explained why it was
essential that immense masses of nitrogenous material must
be manufactured; and called for the immediate enrolment
of volunteers from selected trades and professions.</p>
<p>As a primary inducement, the scale of remuneration
offered was far above the normal pay in any given line. It
was, in fact, so high that I fell at once to calculating the
approximate total of wages which would be payable weekly;
and the figures took me by surprise when I worked them
out. No single private fortune, however gigantic, could
have kept the machinery running for even a few months at
the uttermost. When I pointed this out to Nordenholt he
seemed amused and rather taken aback; but his surprise was
at my obtuseness and not at my calculations.</p>
<p>“Well, I’m slightly astonished, Flint. I thought you
would have seen deeper into it than that. Hasn’t it
occurred to you that within six weeks money, as we understand
it, will be valueless? If we pay up during the time
we are getting things arranged, that will be all that is
required. Once the colony is founded, there will be no
trade between it and the outside world, naturally; and
inside our own group we could arrange any type of currency
we choose. But, as a matter of fact, we shall go on
just as usual; and Treasury notes sufficient for the purpose
are already being printed.”</p>
<p>But the cash inducement was not the only one upon
which he relied even in his preliminary moves. Patriotism,
the spirit of public service, the promise of opportunities for
talent and many other driving forces were enlisted in the
campaign. These more specialised appeals were mainly
sent out in the form of advertisements in the newspapers—great
whole-page announcements which appeared in unusual
places in the journals. I suppose to a man of enormous
wealth most things are possible, especially when the wealth
is coupled with a personality like Nordenholt’s; but it
certainly amazed me to find his advertisements taking the
place of the normal “latest news” space in many papers.
Nor was this the only way in which his influence made
itself felt. The editorial comments, and even the news
columns of the journals, dealt at length with his scheme;
and he secured the support of papers which were quite
above any suspicion of being amenable to outside influence.
On the face of it, of course, his plans—so far as they were
made public—were obviously sound; but I cannot help
feeling that below this almost unanimous chorus of praise
in the leading articles there must be some influence at work
beyond mere casual approbation. Very probably Nordenholt
had seen his way to enlist the sympathy of editors by
some more direct methods, possibly by calling the controllers
of policy together and utilising his magnetic personality and
persuasive powers.</p>
<p>In my own field of work at the first I found some
difficulties in my dealings with the Trades Union officials,
who were suspicious of our methods. They feared that we
contemplated dilution on a huge scale; and they were
anxious to know the details of our plans. I consulted
Nordenholt on the point and found him prepared.</p>
<p>“Of course that was bound to arise as soon as we began
to move on a big scale. Well, you can assure them that
we shall act strictly according to the law of the matter.
Promise them that as far as working conditions go, we shall
begin by letting the men fix their own hours of work; and
if any man is dissatisfied with these, we will pay him on
the spot a bonus of six months’ wages and let him leave
instantly if he so desires.</p>
<p>“Point out to them that, in the cases of some trades,
I may have to enlist the majority of the Unionists in the
country; and that I am not going to tie their hands by
any previous arrangements: they shall settle the matter
for themselves. If that doesn’t satisfy them, you may tell
them definitely—and put it in writing if they wish—that
under no circumstances will I expect my employés to work
for longer hours or less pay than any other Trades Unionist
in the country.”</p>
<p>I jotted the phrase down in my pocket-book.</p>
<p>“I may as well tell you, Flint, that I have given instructions
to the recruiting offices. No Trades Union
Leader will be engaged by me under any circumstances
whatever. It’s real working men that I want; and I don’t
think much of the Union leaders from the point of view of
actual work.”</p>
<p>He looked at me for a moment and I saw a faint smile on
his face.</p>
<p>“It seems to me, Flint, that even yet you haven’t
managed to see this thing in perspective. You must really
get into your mind the fact that there is going to be a
clean break between the old system and the new one we
are making. Look at the thing in all its bearings. Once
we are up North, men shall work for me as I choose and
for what I choose. There will be no Factory Acts and
Trades Union regulations or any other hindrance to our
affairs. They come here and try to put a spoke in my
wheel? I don’t mind that at all. But I do see that they
are trying, whether wilfully or through sheer ignorance, to
hamper this work which is essential to the race. Therefore
I propose to meet them with fair words. It’s not for me
to enlighten their ignorance if it has persisted up to now
in the face of all this. I make them that promise, and
if they can’t understand its meaning, that is no affair of
mine. <i>We</i> know, if they’re too dense to see it, that in
a few months there won’t be a Trades Unionist left in the
country, outside the colony! There will be no wages
drawn outside our frontier; so even if I paid our men
nothing, still I should be keeping my promise to the strict
letter.”</p>
<p>“I see your point,” I said; “all’s fair and so forth?”</p>
<p>“Also, we shall have trouble, up there, I have no doubt.
Probably there will be a ca’ canny party among our recruits.
They will have every chance at first. I won’t interfere
with them. But once the situation clears up a little, I
shall deal with them—and I shall do it by the hand of
their own fellows. They won’t last long. Now get
along and promise these officials exactly what I have told
you.”</p>
<p>I offered no criticisms of his methods. His brain was
far better than mine. When I remember that he must
have drafted the outlines of his scheme and arranged most
of the preliminaries of its execution in less time than it
would have taken me to decide upon a new factory-site,
I am still lost in amazement at the combination of wide
outlook and tremendous concentration of thought which
the task involved.</p>
<p>Despite the carefully-planned deterrents which appeared
in the proclamations, the recruiting was enormous from
the first. “Nordenholt’s Million”—as the popular phrase
ran—was not really a million at all; but Nordenholt knew
the influence of a round figure upon the public imagination
and it was near enough for all practical purposes. He had
looked on the thing in the broadest possible lines at the
start, and had drawn up a rough classification for the
use of the recruiting stations. To begin with, he limited
the enlistment to men between the ages of twenty-five
and thirty-five; though exceptional cases received special
consideration. On this basis, he expected to get all the
men he required. Three-quarters of a million of these
were to be married men with an upper limit of four
children, preferably between the ages of six and twelve.
In addition to this, he was prepared to accept half a million
young unmarried men. Half a million unmarried girls
were also selected. The net result of this was that in the
end he obtained in round numbers the following classes:</p>
<table style="border-spacing: 2px;padding: 2px;border-width: 0px;" data-summary="table">
<tbody><tr><td>Husbands</td><td class="tdr">              750,000</td></tr>
<tr><td>Wives</td><td class="tdr">                  750,000</td></tr>
<tr><td>Children </td><td class="tdr">            2,250,000</td></tr>
<tr><td>Bachelors      </td><td class="tdr">              500,000</td></tr>
<tr><td>Girls </td><td class="tdr">                 500,000</td></tr>
<tr><td> </td><td class="tdr"> ————</td></tr>
<tr><td class="tdr">Total      </td><td class="tdr">   4,750,000</td></tr>
</tbody></table>
<p>That left a margin of a quarter of a million below his
original estimate of five millions; and this he kept free
for the time being, partly because some of the number
would be made up by specialists who did not come under
the general recruitment organisation and partly, possibly,
for taking in at the last moment any cases which might be
specially desirable.</p>
<p>At a later date I had an opportunity of questioning him
as to his reasons in laying down this classification: and
they struck me as sound.</p>
<p>“In the first place, I want a solid backbone to this
enterprise. I get that by selecting the married men. They
have got a stake in the thing already in their wives, and
especially in their children. I know that the children mean
the consumption of a vast quantity of food for which we
shall get no direct return in the form of labour; but I
believe that the steadying effect introduced by them will be
worth the loss. We are going to put this colony under
a strain which is about as great as human nature can bear;
and I want everything on our side that can be brought
there.</p>
<p>“Then again, they will help to form a sort of public
opinion. Don’t forget that the ultimate aim of this affair is
to carry on the race. I could have done that by selecting
bachelors and girls in equal numbers and simply going
ahead on that basis. But we must have discipline; and
unless you have some established order we should simply
have ended by a Saturnalia. You couldn’t have prevented
it, considering the nervous strain we are going to put on
these people. I have no use for that sort of thing; so I
chose a majority of men with families, whose natural instincts
are to keep down the bacchanalian element among
the unmarried.</p>
<p>“But in addition to these married men, I needed others
who had a free hand and who had only their own lives
to risk. In certain lines, the unmarried man can be relied
upon where the married man shivers in his shoes to some
extent. That accounts for the bachelor element.</p>
<p>“But, since a preponderance of males over females would
be bound to lead to trouble, I had to enrol enough girls
to bring up the balance. Possibly they may also serve to
spur on the younger men to work; and they will be able
to help in the actual task before us in a good many ways,
like the Munition girls of the War period.”</p>
<p>It seemed to me then the only possible solution of the
problem; and it worked in practice. We can’t tell how
things would have fared if any other arrangements had been
made, so I must leave it at that. Anyway, I think Nordenholt
enlisted two of the strongest instincts of humanity on
his side in addition to the fear of hunger: and that was
a definite gain.</p>
<p>“Nordenholt’s Million” was, of course, a microcosm of
the national industries. It would serve no purpose to catalogue
the trades which were represented in it. Miners,
iron- and steel-workers, electricians and makers of electrical
machinery preponderated; but Nordenholt had looked
ahead to agriculture and the needs of the population after
the danger of famine was past.</p>
<p>In the early stages, the statistical branch—recruited from
the great insurance companies—was perhaps the hardest
worked of all. The most diverse problems presented themselves
for treatment; and they could only be handled in the
most rough-and-ready fashion until we were able to bring
calculation to bear. Without the help of the actuaries, I
believe that there would have been a collapse at various
points, in spite of all our foresight.</p>
<p>I have not attempted to do more than indicate in outline
the activities which engrossed us at that time. In my
memory, it lives as a period of frantic and often very
successful improvisation. New problems cropped up at
every turn. The decision of one day might entail a
recasting of plans in some field which at first sight seemed
totally divorced from the question under consideration.
Each line of that complex system had to be kept abreast
of the rest, so that there was no disjunction, no involuntary
halt for one section to come up with the remainder, no
clash between two departments of the organisation. And
yet, somehow, it seemed to work with more smoothness
than we had expected. Behind us all, seated at the nucleus
of that complex web of activities, there was Nordenholt,
seldom interfering but always ready to give a sharp decision
should the need arise. And I think the presence of that
cool intelligence behind us had a moral effect upon our
minds. He never lessened our initiative, never showed any
sign of vexation when things began to go wrong. He
treated us all as colleagues, though we knew that he was
our master. And under his examination, difficulties seemed
to fade away in our hands.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>It was not until the meeting of Parliament that the
Government connection with Nordenholt’s scheme became
known to the public; but on the first day of the session the
Prime Minister introduced a Bill which subsequently
became the Billeting Act; and this brought to light the
fact that Nordenholt was not working merely as a private
individual. Under the Act, the Government took powers
to house the Nitrogen Volunteers, as they were termed,
in any locality which might be found necessary. The
wording of the Act gave them the fullest power in this
matter; but it was so contrived that no one suspected the
establishment of only a single Nitrogen Area.</p>
<p>In his speech on the second Reading, the Premier excelled
all his previous tactical exercises. He explained very clearly
the nature of the peril which threatened the country; and
he pointed out that the measure was necessary in order
to cope with the danger. The new Nitrogen work would
entail great shiftings of labour hither and thither, as the new
factories grew up; and it was essential to provide dwellings
for the artisans engaged in the industry. Everything must
give way to this; and since houses could not be built in the
short time available, some sort of arrangement must be made
which would, he hoped, be merely temporary. He explained
that the Government had empowered Nordenholt to carry out
the early arrangements; and he was able to give statistics
showing the progress which had already been made during
the last few days.</p>
<p>At the same time, he introduced a second Bill, somewhat
on the lines of the old Defence of the Realm Act, which
enabled the Government to cope with circumstances as they
arose without the necessity of prolonged Parliamentary
debates.</p>
<p>So ingeniously did he handle the matter that there was
practically no opposition to either measure. It must be
remembered that the influence of the Press had been exerted
almost entirely in favour of Nordenholt’s scheme. The
previous clamour for action had been succeeded by a chorus
of praise; and the bold initiative shown in the Nitrogen
plans had been acclaimed throughout the country.</p>
<p>Meanwhile, Nordenholt was making the best of two
worlds. Nominally, he was engaged in a private enterprise
over which the Government had no control; actually, he
had the whole State machinery at his back to assist him in
his operations. This dual nature of the matter enabled him
to carry out his work with a minimum of interference from
red taped officials, while at the same time he was able
to command the resources of State Departments in any line
wherein they could be of service to him. After the passing
of the two Acts, the Government adjourned Parliament, to
avoid the putting of awkward questions; so that during the
ensuing weeks the Nitrogen undertaking could progress
without any fear of interference or undue publicity.</p>
<p>Transport was the first problem which occupied Nordenholt’s
attention. It was in this connection that I caught
my first glimpse of the “Nordenholt Gang” at work. The
executive staffs of the railways were left intact, but one day
there descended upon them a quiet little man in spectacles
with full authority in his pocket. Grogan had apparently
never been connected with railways in his life, as far as
I knew, but he took control of the whole system in the
country without showing the faintest sign of hesitation.
How he acquired his knowledge, I never learned; but I
gathered that he had originally made his mark by his
investigations of the effect of trade-routes upon commerce.</p>
<p>His work was to indicate the broad outlines of the scheme,
and the railway officials then filled in the details. Yet I
was told that he seemed to know to a truck the demands
which his projects would entail upon the railways; and
he never put forward anything which led to a breakdown.
I think he had that type of mind which sees straight through
the details to the core of an undertaking and which yet
retains in due perspective the minutiæ of the machinery.</p>
<p>And it was not only the railways which he had in his
charge. All the motor services were brought under his
control as well. It was a bewilderingly complex affair;
and he had to act as a kind of liaison centre between the
two departments, clearing up any troubles which arose and
co-ordinating the twin methods of transport. I think he
had the power of mental visualisation developed to an
abnormal extent; and his memory must have been quite
out of the common. To assist him, he had the largest
railway map I have ever seen—it covered a whole floor—and
on it were placed blocks of metal showing the exact
situation of every truck, carriage and locomotive in the
kingdom. These were moved from time to time by
his assistants in accordance with telegraphic information;
and if he doubted his recollections at any moment he could
go and study the groupings upon it.</p>
<p>I remember seeing him once when things had got slightly
out of gear, his hands full of telegraph forms, his feet
encased in felt slippers to avoid marking the surface of
the map, studying a point in the Welsh system where a
number of trucks had been stranded in sidings. With the
briefest consideration he seemed to come to a decision, for
he gave his orders to an assistant:</p>
<p>“Locomotive, Newport to Crumlin, <i>via</i> Tredegar
Junction. (It can’t go through Abercarne, because the
3.46 is on the line now and I don’t want to waste time
shunting.) Then on to Cwm—C-w-m—to pick up
twenty-seven trucks in the siding. All right. After that,
back to Aberbeeg—b-double-e-g—since the line is blocked
at Victoria by No. 702. Then Blaina—B-l-a-i-n-a—and
Abergavenny. All right.... Stop a moment. Map-measure,
please. Motor Fleet 37 will be at Abergavenny
about then with some stores for the North. Hold train at
Abergavenny and wire them to stop No. 37 as it passes.
That will fill up ten trucks, I think. All right. Train
Hereford, Birmingham, via Leominster. Load twelve trucks
Birmingham. Tamworth, pick up five truck-loads—food,
that red block there—then North behind No. 605. All right.
Then wire Abergavenny to send No. 37 to Monmouth.
They’ll get their orders there. All right.”</p>
<p>So it went on, I am told, hour after hour, throughout the
day. Even the details of the diurnal traffic were not
sufficient; for as he went along, he planned the night-operations
as well. When he retired for the short sleep-time
which he took, every point had been regulated for
the ensuing five hours.</p>
<p>At first, everything culminated in the word “North”;
but almost immediately the whirling traffic on the south
going rails had to be considered also, as it grew in volume.
How he managed it, I do not know; but he seemed to
have some sub-conscious faculty of drawing a balance-sheet
of the traffic at any moment; so that he knew if he was
sending too much North or too little South. Personally,
I imagine that he owed his success to a power akin to that of
the professional chess-player who can play a dozen blindfold
games at one time. Everybody has the faculty of mental
visualisation developed in a greater or less degree; but in
Grogan, as far as traffic was concerned, it seems to have
attained supernormal proportions. I believe that he actually
“saw” in his mind the whole of England covered with his
trains and motor fleets and that he had by some means
established time-scales which enabled him to calculate the
moments at which any train or fleet would pass a series of
given points. It was, of course, an immensely more difficult
affair than blindfold chess-playing; but I think it clearly
depended upon cognate processes.</p>
<p>Congleton, the Shipping Director, had a much easier
task. For him there was no trouble of blocked rails or
interleaving traffic. His main difficulty arose from berthing
accommodation, which was a comparatively simple affair.
Most of the food-supplies were transferred North on board
ship; and a certain amount of the shifting of population
was also done in this way, especially the removal of the
Glasgow inhabitants.</p>
<p>I can only give the merest outline of these great operations;
for the details are too intricate to be described here.
Nordenholt’s first step was to commandeer most of the
public halls in the country, which were then fitted up with
partitions, etc., in order to convert them into temporary
dwelling-places for families. Thereafter, he began to move
his Nitrogen Volunteers into the Clyde Valley step by step;
and simultaneously, under the Billeting Act, he evicted the
local population to make room for his men. There was a
considerable outcry; and at times the military had to be
employed to persuade the reluctant to move out of their
homes; but after the first few cases of obstruction had
been dealt with firmly, the people recognised that it was
useless to protest. Edinburgh was also treated in the same
way; for Nordenholt had planned to occupy a belt of
country running from coast to coast. He had to find room
for a population of five millions; and it was evidently going
to be a difficult matter.</p>
<p>Looking back upon it now, it was a wonderful piece of
work, carried out without any very serious hitches. To
transfer a population of nearly ten millions, and to distribute
five millions of that over a wide area of England—for this was
the only way in which house-room could be found for them—was
a gigantic task. Fabulous sums were expended in
finding living-room for the refugees in the houses of residents
throughout England; and eventually all of them had roofs
over their heads, in private dwellings, in converted halls or
in commandeered hotels.</p>
<p>Meanwhile, in Glasgow itself, the ever-growing Nitrogen
Area was surrounded with military pickets which prevented
the mingling of new-comers and the old population. This
precaution of Nordenholt’s was mainly directed against the
possibility of rioting; for the feeling between the expelled
inhabitants and the incomers was extremely bitter: but it
served another purpose in that it tended to surround the
Nitrogen Area with a certain atmosphere of mystery. This
was heightened by the stoppage of all telegraphic and telephonic
communication between Glasgow and the South.
Soon the only information obtainable in England with
regard to affairs in the Clyde Valley came from emigrants;
and with the end of the exodus, even the mails ceased and
an impenetrable veil fell between the two parts of the
island.</p>
<p>A similar screen had fallen between England and Ireland
at a slightly earlier date. All postal and telegraphic communication
was broken off, and no vessels were permitted
to trade with the Irish ports. It was by this means that
the knowledge of the great Raid was kept secret. Nordenholt
was almost ready to disclose his hand; and the Raid
could not be postponed if any cattle were to be obtained
alive. By a series of lightning sweeps, the military rounded
up all the available live-stock in the island and drove them
to the nearest ports, where ships were awaiting them. Bitter
guerrilla warfare raged along the tracks of the columns; and
the last pages in Irish history were marked with bloodshed.
Not that it mattered much, since all were to die in any case
before very long.</p>
<p>But I am now coming to the last stages of the exodus.
All the required food, all the available machinery and all
the Nitrogen Volunteers had been sent up into the Clyde
Valley. Without warning, after a secret session, Parliament
had resolved to transfer itself to Glasgow. Now came the
final moves. On the last day, only pickets of the Military
Volunteers—the Labour Defence Force, as Nordenholt had
renamed them—were left behind in every important town.</p>
<p>During that night a carefully-planned course of destruction
was followed. Every telegraph and telephone exchange was
gutted; the remaining artillery was rendered useless; all
the printing machinery of newspapers was wrecked; every
aeroplane destroyed and practically all aerodromes burned:
and as the trains and motors went northward in the night,
bridge after bridge on the line or road was blown up. When
morning came, there was a complete stoppage of all the
normal channels of communication; and up to the Border,
the railways had been put out of action for months. It was
the second step in Nordenholt’s plan.</p>
<p>Hitherto, I have chronicled his successes; but now I
must deal with his single failure. He had intended to
persuade the King to take refuge in the Clyde Valley, and
had even, I believe, found a residence for him near Glasgow.
Here, however, he met with a rebuff. I never learned the
details of the interview; but it appears that the King refused
to save himself. He felt it his duty to share the fate of his
people. Nordenholt pleaded that if the King himself would
not come, at least the Prince of Wales might be sent; but
here also he failed to carry his point. The Prince point-blank
rejected the suggestion. Knowing Nordenholt, I
could hardly conceive that his persuasive proposals could
fail to take effect; but it was evident that he met with
no success.</p>
<p>“He understood perfectly,” Nordenholt said to me later.
“Both of them thoroughly understood what it meant. I
think they felt that a Crown rescued at that price wouldn’t
be worth wearing. At any rate, they refused to come
North.”</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 class="nobreak"><small>CHAPTER VIII</small><br/>


The Clyde Valley</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">Hitherto</span> my narrative has had a certain unity; for I
have been describing a chain of events, each of which followed
naturally from its fore-runners; but now comes a bifurcation.
I have explained how the Clyde Valley had been isolated,
step by step, from the rest of the country; and when the
last food-stores and troops had been brought into the
Nitrogen Area, communications between the two districts
ceased. From that moment, the two regions had different
histories; and I cannot deal with them in an intertwined
chronological sequence. I shall therefore continue my
account of the Clyde Valley experiment now; and shall
deal later with the collapse of civilisation in England.</p>
<p>When planning his colony, Nordenholt decided to occupy
a belt of country between the Forth and Clyde which
contained all the required materials in the form of coal and
iron. Other things, such as copper, he brought into the
region in quantities which he believed would suffice for
months.</p>
<p>The frontier included something like a thousand square
miles of territory; and within the boundary lay the whole
industrial tract of mid-Scotland with its countless pits,
mines, foundries, factories, ship-building yards and other
resources.</p>
<p>Under Congleton’s arrangements, as many ships as
possible had been brought into the Clyde and Forth at
the last moment; and thereafter the Navy blocked the
entrances with mine-fields upon an enormous scale. Nothing,
either surface craft or submarine, could have penetrated
either estuary.</p>
<p>Aerial defence was a secondary matter. No invasion in
force would come by that road; and the destruction of the
aerodromes had disposed of any early attempts at mere
malicious damage. Defences were established, however,
around the central area; and to accommodate the aeroplanes
and airships which had been brought North, immense
flying-grounds were laid out on the level reaches of the
lower Clyde.</p>
<p>The storage of the food-supplies cost much thought; but
by utilising every spare corner, including railway and tramway
depots, it had been possible to get them all under cover
and under guard. A strict rationing system was put in
force, though the allowance was quite up to normal
quantities. The main trouble was, as Nordenholt had
anticipated, a shortage of vegetables; and there was also
a considerable deficit in the meat-supply. However, after
a complete census had been taken, it seemed likely that
we should be able to hold out without much difficulty.</p>
<p>These material factors had given little trouble in our
arrangements; but when the human counters came into
the question, the resulting complications were much greater
than appeared at first sight. Taking the problem at its
simplest, we had coal at the one end and manufactured
nitrogenous products at the other; and the quantity of the
latter depended roughly on the amount of the former, since
coal represented our source of energy and also part of our
raw material in certain of the processes employed. But,
in addition, we needed coal for lighting, either by gas or
electricity, and also for heating; so that our actual coal
output had to be larger than that required for the mere
fixation of nitrogen. Then the number of miners had
to be adjusted in proportion to those of the remaining
workmen in each stage of the process; for it was wasteful
to feed men who were employed in producing a superfluity
which could not be utilised. Again, the problem was
complicated by the fact that the coal could not immediately
be used as it was hewn. Time had to be allowed for the
construction and erection of the machinery whereby the
atmospheric nitrogen was to be fixed; and this introduced
further complications into the calculations. Finally, to
omit intermediate details, the number of labourers required
for spreading the nitrogenous manure upon the soil was
governed by the quantities of this material which could
be prepared.</p>
<p>But even when calculations had been made which covered
all this ground, a further factor entered into the problem.
In dealing with a million workers, death, disease and accidents
have to be taken into account, since in their effects they
touch large numbers of individuals. The incidence of
these factors is not uniform in all trades; and hence
corrections had to be introduced to bring the various groups
into proportion.</p>
<p>The whole of these calculations had, of course, been
made during the period of enrolment; and the reason I
lay stress upon them at this stage is to show how accurately
each section of the machine was dovetailed into the neighbouring
parts. It was impossible to foresee everything:
in fact what happened showed that some factors are beyond
calculation. But when the Nitrogen Area started as a
going concern, everything possible had been provided for,
as far as could be seen. It was no fault of Nordenholt’s
that things went as they did in the end.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>With the segregation of the Nitrogen Area from the
rest of the Kingdom, and the transference of Parliament
to Glasgow, a problem arose which required instant settlement.
A dual control in the district might have been
fraught with all manner of evil possibilities; and it
was essential, once for all, to decide where the ultimate
power lay. Nordenholt allowed no time to be wasted in
the matter. At the first meeting of the House of Commons
after the Area was definitely closed, he took his seat as a
Member and moved the adjournment of the House on a
matter of urgent public importance. His speech, as reported
officially, was very short.</p>
<p>“Mr. Speaker—Sir, I have watched the proceedings in
this House closely during the last weeks; and I have
noted that a certain number of members seem animated
by a spirit of factious opposition to the Government
measures. I call the attention of the House to the state
of grave peril in which we all stand; and I ask them if
this conduct has their support. I have no wish to complicate
matters. We have all of us more responsibility on
our shoulders than we can bear; and I have no sympathy
with these methods. Those who think with me in this
matter will vote with me in the lobby. I move that this
House do now adjourn.”</p>
<p>The motion was seconded and the question put without
further debate. About forty members went into the lobby
against Nordenholt. While they were still there, he drew
a whistle from his pocket and blew three shrill blasts. A
picket of the Labour Defence Force entered the House
in response to the signal and arrested the malcontent
members, whom they removed in custody. When the
remainder of the Members returned to the Chamber,
Nordenholt took his stand before the Mace.</p>
<p>“Gentlemen”—he dropped the usual ceremonial form
of address—“I wished to allow these members who do
not agree with me to select themselves; and I adopted
the simplest and most convincing method of doing so,
though I could have laid my hand on every one of them
without this demonstration. These gentlemen, it appears,
are not satisfied with the manner in which things are being
done here. I would point out to you that the creation
of the Nitrogen Area has been mine from the start; and
that the machinery of it is controlled by me now. There
is no room for dual control in an enterprise of this magnitude.
I offer you all positions in which you can help the
remnant of the nation in saving itself; but there are no
such positions in this House. Do you agree?”</p>
<p>For a moment there was silence, then an angry murmur
ran from bench to bench. Nordenholt continued:</p>
<p>“Those members who were removed from the House
will to-night be embarked on airships; and by this time
to-morrow I trust that they will all be safely landed, each in
the constituency which he represents. Since they do not wish
to aid us in the Nitrogen Area, it is fitting that they should
go back to their constituents and assist them in the troubles
which are about to break upon them. Are you content?”</p>
<p>Again there was a murmur, but this time less defiant.</p>
<p>“Finally, gentlemen, as I hear some whispers of constitutionalism,
I have here a Proclamation by the King.
He has dissolved Parliament. You are no longer clothed
with even the semblance of authority.”</p>
<p>The assembly was thunderstruck; for there seemed
to be no reply to this.</p>
<p>“I may say,” continued Nordenholt, “that some of you
are of no personal value in this enterprise. These gentlemen
also will be returned to their proper residences
immediately. The remainder, whom I can trust, will be
so good as to apply at my offices to-morrow, when their
work will be explained to them. There is only one
ultimate authority here now—myself.”</p>
<p>It was a sadly diminished assembly that appeared on the
morrow. Neither the Prime Minister nor the Colonial
Secretary was found among its numbers.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>With the working men who formed the majority of the
Nitrogen Volunteers, Nordenholt’s methods were entirely
different. Here he had in the first stages to conciliate
those with whom he dealt and to educate them gradually
into an understanding of the task before them. In the
beginning, no man worked more than eight hours per
day or five days a week; and the general run of the
workmen had a thirty-five hour week. Nordenholt’s
object in this was two-fold. In the first place, he instilled
into the men that he was an easy task-master; and
secondly, he was able, by keeping check of the output,
to place his finger upon those men who even under those
easy conditions were not doing their full share. These
workers he proposed to eliminate at a later period; but
he wished to allow them to condemn themselves.</p>
<p>Next he set going various newspapers. The contents
of these, of course, dealt entirely with doings within the
Nitrogen Area; but their readers soon grew accustomed
to this: and as the main object of the journals was
propaganda, the less actual news there was in them, the
more likely it became that the propaganda would be read
for want of something better.</p>
<p>Through these papers, he began to explain very clearly
the necessity for the work upon which they were engaged,
handling the subject in all manner of ways and making
it seem almost new each time by the fresh treatment which
it received from day to day. During this period no hint of
the underlying purpose of the Nitrogen Area was given,
beyond the suggestion that it was a convenient spot, in
view of its natural resources.</p>
<p>In order to alleviate any grievances which they might
feel, he devised a system of workmen’s committees, one for
each trade; and the members of these bodies were elected
separately by the married and unmarried men in proportion
to their numbers. In this way he secured a majority of the
more responsible men upon each committee, although no
fault could be found with the method of election. Whatever
grievances were ventilated by these committees were
met immediately or the reasons against compliance with
the demands were clearly and courteously explained.</p>
<p>In fact, throughout this stage of the Nitrogen Area
history, Nordenholt’s main object was to show himself in
the light of a comrade rather than a task-master. He was
building up a fund of popularity, even at considerable cost,
in order that he might draw upon it later. It was a difficult
game to play; for he could not afford to drive with an
altogether loose rein in view of the necessity for haste; but,
as he himself said, he understood men; and he was perhaps
able to gain their confidence at a cheaper rate than most
people in his position could have done. Like myself, he
believed that fundamentally the working man is a sound
man, provided that he is dealt with openly and is not made
suspicious.</p>
<p>Within a fortnight, in one way and another, practically
every man in the Area understood the importance of his
work. I question whether this was not the greatest of
Nordenholt’s triumphs, though perhaps in perspective it may
seem a small affair in comparison with other events. But
the generation of enthusiasm is a difficult matter, much
more difficult than feats which produce immediate effects.</p>
<p>In one respect Nordenholt gauged the psychology of
the masses accurately. He did not make himself cheap.
Except at a few mass meetings which he addressed, none of
the rank and file ever saw him at all. He knew the value
of aloofness and a touch of mystery.</p>
<p>But he did not confine himself to moves made openly
upon the board. Behind the scenes he had collected an
Intelligence Division, the existence of which was known only
to a few; and by means of it he was able to put his finger
on a weak spot or a centre of disaffection with extraordinary
promptitude. Grievances were often remedied long before
the appropriate committee had been able to cast their statement
of them into a definite form. Nor, as I shall have to
tell later, did this Intelligence Division confine its operations
to the Nitrogen Area itself; for its network spread over the
whole Kingdom.</p>
<p>As soon as the machinery of the Area was working
satisfactorily, Nordenholt took a step in advance. The
Workmen’s Committees were supplied with the actual
statistics of production and it was explained to them that
speeding-up must begin. The ultimate object was still
concealed; but sufficient information was laid before them
to show that at their present rate of output the nitrogenous
materials prepared by the end of the twelve months would
be totally insufficient to yield food enough for even the
population of the Area itself, without taking the outer regions
into account. They were then asked to suggest means by
which output might be raised; and time was given them to
think the matter out in all its bearings. Without hesitation
they agreed that there must be an increase in productivity.</p>
<p>To raise the output and also to check the points where
any loss was occurring, Nordenholt introduced a series of
statistical charts and at the same time divided the workmen
in each trade into gangs of a definite number. At the end
of each week, these charts were submitted to the Trade
Committee and the gangs which were failing to do their
share were indicated. By pointing out that a fixed quantity
of material must be obtained per week unless disaster were
to ensue, Nordenholt was able to make it clear to the
Committees that slackness in one gang entailed extra
exertions on the rest. There was no question of an
employer trying to force up the standard of work: it was
simply a question whether they wished to starve or live.</p>
<p>The effect of this was striking; and certainly it was a
novelty in working conditions. Every man became a policeman
for his neighbours, since he knew that slackness on
their part would demand greater exertions upon his own.
The Committees instituted a system of inspectors, nominated
by themselves, to see that work was properly carried out;
and these inspectors reported both to the Committees and to
Nordenholt himself, through special officials. Before long,
both the Committees and Nordenholt had an extensive
black list of inefficient workers; and the stage was being
set for another drastic lesson.</p>
<p>For three days the Area newspapers contained full accounts
of the state into which things had drifted; and it was made
obvious even to the most ignorant what the inevitable result
would be if the output were not raised. Then, having thus
prepared his ground, Nordenholt summoned a meeting of
workmen delegates. It was the first time that most of
those present had seen him; and I think he counted upon
making his personality tell. He had no chairman or any of
the usual machinery of a meeting; everything was concentrated
upon the tall dark figure, alone upon the platform.</p>
<p>It was a short speech which he made; but he delivered it
very slowly, making every point tell as he went along and
leaving time for each statement to sink well home into the
minds of his audience. He began by a clear account of the
objects for which they were working—and he had the gift
of lucid exposition. He handled the statistical side of the
matter in detail, and yet so simply that even the dullest
could understand him. When he had completed his survey,
every man present saw the state of affairs in all its bearings.</p>
<p>Then, for the first time, he explained to them that those
in the Nitrogen Area were all that could be saved; and that
their salvation could be accomplished only at the cost of
labour far in excess of anything they had anticipated.</p>
<p>“Now, men,” he continued, “remember that I am not
your task-master. I am merely striving, like yourselves, to
avert this calamity; and I think I have already shown you
that I have spent my best efforts in our common cause. I
have no wish to dictate to you. I leave the decision in your
own hands. Those of you who wish to starve may do so.
It is your own decision; even though it involves your wives
and families, I will not interfere. I ask no man to work
harder than he thinks necessary.</p>
<p>“But I put this point before you. Is it right that a man
who will not strain himself in the common service should
reap where he has not sown? Is it right that any man
should batten upon the labour of you all while refusing to do
his utmost? Will you permit wilful inefficiency to rob you
and your children of their proper share in the means of
safety? Or do you believe that this community should rid
itself of parasites?</p>
<p>“I leave myself entirely in your hands in the matter.
I take no decision without your consent. If you choose to
toil in order that they may take bread from your children’s
mouths, it is no affair of mine. I will do my best for you
all, in any case. But I would be neglecting my duty did I
not warn you that there is no bread to spare. Every
mouthful has been counted; and even at the best we shall
just struggle through.</p>
<p>“These are the facts. Do you wish to retain these
inefficients among you? Without your consent, I can make
no move. I ask you here and now for your decision.”</p>
<p>He held the meeting in the hollow of his hand. Cries of
“No. Away with them. No spongers,” and the like were
heard on all sides. Nordenholt held up his hand, and
silence came at once. The meeting hung on his words.</p>
<p>“Those in favour of allowing this inefficiency to continue,
stand up.”</p>
<p>No one rose.</p>
<p>“Very good, men. I will carry out your decision.
This meeting is at an end.”</p>
<p>The morning papers contained a full report of his
speech; but before they were in the hands of the populace,
Nordenholt had acted. All the ca’ canny workmen had
been arrested during the night, along with their families,
and removed to the southern boundary, where they were
placed on trains and motors ready for transport to the
Border. The thing was done with absolute silence and
with such efficiency that it seemed more like kidnapping
than an ordinary process of arrest. Nordenholt knew the
advantage of mystery; and he proposed to make these
disappearances strike home on the public mind. The
inefficients vanished without leaving a clue behind.</p>
<p>At the Border, each of them was supplied with provisions
exactly equivalent to the rations remaining in the outer
world; and they were then abandoned as they stood.
Nothing was ever known of their fate. When the works
opened again in the morning, their fellows missed them
from the gangs and time enough was allowed for their
disappearance to sink in; after which a redistribution took
place which closed up the gaps. But the very mystery
served to heighten the effect of the lesson. For the first
time, Fear in more than one form had entered the Nitrogen
Area.</p>
<p>I remembered what Nordenholt had said to me some
weeks earlier: “I shall deal with them—and I shall do it
by the hand of their own fellows.”</p>
<p>So you can understand the roaring tide of industry which
mounted day by day in the Area. This sudden stroke had
done more than anything else to convince the people of the
seriousness of the situation. Ten thousand men had been
condemned and had vanished on an instant—Nordenholt
made no secret of the number; and the remainder realised
that things must indeed be grave when a step of this kind
had been necessary. He had given no time for amendment:
condemnation had been followed by the execution of the
sentence: and it was they themselves who had pronounced
the decree. They could not lay it upon his shoulders.
And the veil of mystery which enwrapped the fate of the
convicted ones had its value in more than one direction.
Had Nordenholt caused them to be shot, public sympathy
would have been aroused. But this impenetrable secrecy
baffled speculation and prevented men from forming any
concrete picture which might arouse compassion.</p>
<p>Choosing his moment, Nordenholt announced that, in
future, the factories would be run continuously, shift after
shift, throughout the twenty-four hours. For a time he
called a halt to the newspaper campaign for increased output.
He would need this form of publicity later; and he
did not wish it to become staled by constant repetition.</p>
<p>For the present he was satisfied. Everything was now
in train and he was into his stride all along the line. At
last statistics were accumulating which would enable him to
gauge exactly how the machinery was running; and he
held his hand until a balance-sheet could be drawn with
accuracy.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>At this point in my narrative I am trying to produce a
conspectus of the Nitrogen Area as it was during that
period in its career. I leave to the imagination of my
readers the task of picturing that gigantic concentration of
human effort: the eternal smoke-cloud from a thousand
chimney-stalks lying ever between us and the sun; the
murky twilight of the streets at noon; the whir of dynamos
and the roar of the great electric arcs; the unintermittent
thunder of trains pouring coal into the city; and, above all,
the half-naked figures in the factories, toiling, toiling, shift
after shift in one incessant strain through the four-and-twenty
hours. No one can ever depict the details of that
panorama.</p>
<p>But alongside this vast outpouring of physical energy
there lay another world, calm, orderly and almost silent,
yet equally important to the end in view: the world of the
scientific experts in their laboratories and research stations.
To pass from one region to the other was like a transition
from pandemonium to a cloister.</p>
<p>Nordenholt had grouped his experts into three main
classes, though of course these groups by no means included
all the investigators he controlled. It was here that the
Nordenholt Gang were strongest, for the path of the scientific
man is one which offered the greatest chances to
Nordenholt’s scheme for the furthering of youth.</p>
<p>In the first place came the group of chemists and electricians
who were engaged upon the improvement of
nitrogen fixation methods; and between this section and
the factories there was a constant <i>liaison</i>; so that each new
plant which was erected might contain the very latest
improvements devised by the experts.</p>
<p>The second group contained the bacteriologists, whose
task it was to investigate the habits of <i>B. diazotans</i>, to
determine whether it could be exterminated in any practical
manner and to discover what methods could be employed
to prevent its ravaging the new crops when they were
obtainable.</p>
<p>Finally, the experts in agriculture overlapped with the
chemical group, since many of the questions before them
were concerned with the chemistry of the soil. I have
already mentioned how the action of <i>B. diazotans</i> disintegrated
the upper strata of the land and reduced the soil to
a friable material. This formed one of the most troublesome
features in the cultivation problem, since the porosity
of the ground allowed water to sink through, and thus
plants sown in the affected fields were left without any
liquid upon which they could draw for sustenance. It was
J. F. Hope, I believe, who finally suggested a solution of
the matter. His process consisted in mixing colloid minerals
such as clays with the soil and thus forming less permeable
beds; and the agricultural experts were able to establish
the minimum percentages of clay which were required in
order to make crops grow.</p>
<p>I have mentioned these points in order to show how
much we in the Area depended upon the pure scientists for
help. But it must not be supposed that only those lines of
scientific investigation capable of immediate application were
kept in view by Nordenholt. I learned later, as I shall tell
in its proper place, that he had cast further afield than that.</p>
<p>I cannot give details of the work on the scientific side,
because I have no intimate acquaintance with them; but I
met the results on every hand in the course of my own
department’s affairs. From day to day a new machine
would be passed for service and put into operation, some
fresh catalyst would be sent down for trial on a large scale
after having been tested in the laboratory, or there might be
a slight variation in the relative quantities of the ingredients
in some of our factory processes. There was a constant
touch between research and large-scale operations.</p>
<p>In the course of this I used often to have to visit the
Research Section; and in some ways I found it a mental
anodyne in my perplexities. These long, airy laboratories,
with their spotless cleanliness and delicate apparatus, formed
a pleasant contrast to the grimy factories and gigantic
machines among which part of my days were passed. And
I found that the popular conception of the scientific man
as a dry-as-dust creature was strangely wide of the mark.
It may be that Nordenholt’s picked men differed from
others of their class; but I found in them a directness in
speech and a sense of humour which I had not anticipated.
After the hurry and confusion of the improvisation which
marked the opening of the Nitrogen Area, the quiet certainty
of the work in the Research Section seemed like a
glimpse of another world. I do not mean that they talked
like super-men or that the investigations were always successful;
but over it all there was an atmosphere of clockwork
precision which somehow gave one confidence. These
men, it struck me for the first time, had always been
contending with Nature in their struggle to wrest her
secrets from her; while we in the other world had been
sparring against our fellows with Nature standing above us
in the conflict, so great and so remote that we had never
understood even that she was there. Now, under the new
conditions, all was changed for us; while to these scientific
experts it was merely the opening of a fresh field in their
long-drawn-out contest.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>During the inception of Nordenholt’s scheme, my own
work had dealt with varied lines of activity which brought
me into contact with diverse departments of the machine;
but when the transfer to the Clyde Valley took place, I
settled down into more definite duties. Nordenholt had
picked me out, I believe, on the strength of my knowledge
of factory organisation; and my first post in the North
dealt with this branch. Thus in the earlier days, my work
took me into the machine-shops and yards where the heavy
machinery was being built or remodelled; and so I came
into direct contact with the human element.</p>
<p>But as time went on, the range of my control increased;
and as my work extended I had to delegate this section
more and more to my subordinates. I became, through a
gradual series of transitions, the checker of efficiency over
most of the Area activities.</p>
<p>The under-current of all my memories of that time is a
series of curves. Graphs of coal-supply from each pit, so
that the fluctuation of output might be controlled and
investigated; graphs of furnace-production from day to day,
whereby all might be kept up to concert-pitch; graphs
comparing one process with another in terms of power and
efficiency; graphs of workmen’s ages and effectiveness;
graphs of total power-consumption; graphs of remaining
food-supplies extrapolated to show probable consumption
under various scales; graphs of population changes; graphs
of health-statistics: all these passed through my hands in
their final form until I began to lose touch with the real
world about me and to look upon disasters costing many
lives merely as something which produced a point of inflexion
in my curves.</p>
<p>Nordenholt had established his central offices in the
University and had cleared the benches from all the classrooms
to make room for his staff. It was probably the best
choice he could have made; since it provided within a
limited area sufficient office-room to house everyone whom
he might wish to call into consultation at a moment’s
notice at any time; and it had the further advantage that
all the scientific experts had been given the University
laboratories to work in, so that they also were within easy
call. He himself had chosen as his private office the old
Senate Room. The Randolph Hall had been fitted up as a
kind of card-index library wherein were stored all the facts
of which he might be in need at any time; and the Court
Room was converted into his secretary’s office and connected
with the Senate Room by a door driven through
the wall.</p>
<p>In Nordenholt’s office a huge graph extended right across
the wall over the fireplace. It was an enormous diagram,
covering the period from the starting of the Nitrogen Area
and extending, as far as its numbered abscissæ were concerned,
beyond the harvest-time in the next year. Each
morning, before Nordenholt came to his office, the new
daily points were inserted on it and joined up with the
preceding curves. One line, in red, expressed the amount
of food remaining; another, in green, showed the quantity
of nitrogenous material synthesised up to date; whilst the
third curve, in purple, indicated approximately the crop
which might be expected from the nitrogenous manure in
hand. Of all the sights in the Nitrogen Area, I think that
series of curves made the deepest impression upon me. It
was so impersonal, a cold record of our position and our
prospects, untinged by any human factor. The slow rise
of the green curve; the steady fall of the red line—our
whole future was locked up in these relative trends.</p>
<p>I remember one morning in Nordenholt’s office, where I
had gone to consult him on some point or other. We had
discussed the matter in hand; and I was about to leave him
when he called me back.</p>
<p>“I haven’t seen much of you lately, Flint,” he said. “Sit
down for a few minutes, will you? I want a rest from all
this for a short time; and I think it would do you good to
get clear of things for a while also. What do you do with
yourself at nights?”</p>
<p>I told him that I usually worked rather late.</p>
<p>“That won’t do as a steady thing. I know the work
has to be done; and I know you have to work till midnight,
and after it often, to keep abreast of things. But if you do
it without a break now and again you’ll simply get stale
and lose grip. You may keep on working long hours; but
what you do in the end won’t be so efficient. Take to-night
off. Come to dinner with me and we’ll try to shake loose
from Nitrogen for a while. I’ve asked Henley-Davenport
also.”</p>
<p>I accepted eagerly enough, though with a somewhat rueful
feeling that it meant harder work on the following day if
I was to overtake arrears. But I wanted to meet Henley-Davenport.
As I mentioned at the beginning of this narrative,
before the irruption of <i>B. diazotans</i> into the world, he
had been engaged upon radioactivity investigations; and I
was anxious to hear what he was doing. I knew that
Nordenholt set great store by his work—he was one of the
Nordenholt young men—and I was interested. But my
main reason for accepting was, of course, Nordenholt himself.
As time went on, he fascinated me more and more; and I
grasped at every opportunity of studying his complex personality.
I doubt if I have been able to throw light upon it in
these pages. I have given vignettes here and there to the
best of my ability; but I know that I have failed to set
down clearly the feeling which he always gave me, the
distinction between the surface personality and the greater
forces moving behind that screen. The superficial part is
easy to describe; but the noumenon of Nordenholt is a
thing beyond me. I only felt it; I never saw it: and I
doubt if any man ever saw it fully revealed.</p>
<p>Just then the door of the secretary’s room opened and
someone came in. Curiously enough, I had never seen
Nordenholt’s secretary before. She seemed to be about
twenty-four, fair-haired and slim, dressed like any other
business girl; but it was her face which struck me most.
She looked fragile and at the corners of the sensitive mouth
I thought I saw evidences of strain. Somehow she seemed
out of place amid all this grimness: her world should have
been one of ease and happiness.</p>
<p>“These are the figures you wanted with regard to A. 323,
Uncle Stanley,” she said, as she handed over a card.</p>
<p>“Thanks, Elsa. By the way, this is Mr. Flint. You’ve
heard me speak of him often. My ward, Miss Huntingtower,
Flint. She acts as my secretary.”</p>
<p>We exchanged the commonplaces usual to the situation.
I noticed that Nordenholt’s voice changed as he spoke to
her: a ring of cheerfulness came into it which was not
usually there. In a few minutes he dismissed her and we
sat down again.</p>
<p>“Now, Flint, there’s another example of the effect of
too hard work. We’re all running things rather fine,
nowadays. As for myself, it doesn’t matter. So long as
I can see this year through, it’s immaterial to me what the
ultimate effect may be. I can afford to run things to their
end. But you younger people have most of your lives
before you. I’m not hinting that you can spare yourselves;
but you must try to leave something for the future. When
it’s all over, we shall still need directors; and you must
manage to combine hard work now with enough reserve
force to prevent a collapse in the moment of success.</p>
<p>“That’s why I planned amusement for the workers as
well as a time schedule for the factories. We aren’t dealing
with machines which can be run continuously and not
suffer. We have to give the men a change of interest.
I suppose some of you thought I was wrong in cumbering
ourselves with all these football players, actors and actresses,
music-hall artistes and so on, who produce nothing directly
towards our object? For all I know you may jib at the
sight of the thousands who go down to the Celtic Park
every Saturday afternoon to watch a gang of professionals
playing Soccer. I don’t. I know that these thousands are
getting fresh air and exercising their lungs in yelling applause.
I couldn’t get them to do it any other way; and I want
them to do it. Then the halls and theatres occupy them
in the evenings when they aren’t working; and that keeps
them from brooding over their troubles. I don’t want men
to accumulate here and there and grouse over the strain I
put on them. That’s why I picked out the best of the
whole Stage and brought them here. The Labour section
is getting better value for its amusement money than it
ever got in its life before; and I’m getting what I want
too.</p>
<p>“That’s why I cornered tobacco and liquor also. We
must remove every scrap of restraint on pleasure, Flint, or
we should have trouble at once. They must have their
smoke and they must have drink in moderation. You can’t
run this kind of colony on narrow lines.</p>
<p>“And there’s another thing, perhaps the most important
of all under the conditions we are in: religion. I’m not
talking about creeds or anything of that kind. I’ve studied
most of them from the point of view of psychology; and
they’re empty things; life left them long ago. But behind
all that mass of outworn lumber there’s a real feeling which
can’t be neglected if we are to get the best out of things.
That’s why I brought all these ministers of the various
denominations into the Area. We must have them; and
as far as I could, I picked the best of them. But I’ll have
no idlers here. They have to do their day’s work with the
rest of us and do their teaching afterwards. Every man
ought to be able to <i>do</i> something. After all, Christ was a
carpenter before He took up His work. That’s what has
been wrong with ninety per cent. of parsons since the
Churches started. They don’t know anything practical and
they mistake talk for work. What was the average sermon
except expanding a text, with illustrations—diluting the
Bible with talk, just as a dishonest milkman waters his
milk.</p>
<p>“Well, I’ve picked the best I could get; and I’ve given
them a free hand. But I wish I were sure where it is all
going to lead. It’s the most difficult problem I ever tackled,
I know. Our conditions aren’t parallel, but I am half-afraid
of reproducing the story of the Anabaptists in Münster.
You can’t get heavy physical and mental tension in an
unprepared population without seeing some strange things.
I introduced these ministers as a brake on that line of
development.</p>
<p>“And what a chance they have! It’s when men are
most helpless that they turn to religion; and here we are
going to have a field in which much might be sown. If
only they are equal to the times! But it’s no affair of mine.
They must work out their own salvation and perhaps the
salvation of their people if they can.</p>
<p>“As for us, Flint, we’ve got enough work of our own in
this world. Take my advice and clear every idea of humanity
out of your mind: stick to your curves and graphs and don’t
think beyond them. If once you let your imagination stray
over the real meaning of them—in toil and pain and death—you’ll
never be able to carry on. I can’t help seeing it all;
and that’s why I pin myself to the Curve there. I don’t
want to look beyond it. I want to keep myself detached
from all that as far as possible; for I can’t afford to be
biased. It’s difficult; and in a few weeks more it will be
still harder, when these unheard cries of agony go up in
the South. But what can one do? I must shut my ears
as best I can and go forward; or everything will fall to
pieces and we shall save nothing out of the wreck. What
a prospect, eh?</p>
<p>“Now, Flint,”—he sprang up—“off to work again, both
of us. We can’t afford to waste time if we are to have an
evening free from worry. I’ll see you at dinner.”</p>
<p>As I reached the door, he called me back and spoke
low:</p>
<p>“By the way, Miss Huntingtower doesn’t know all our
plans. Keep off the subject of the South. She hasn’t been
told anything about that; and I want to keep it from her
as long as I can. You understand?”</p>
<p>“Yes, if you wish it. But surely she must have some
knowledge of the state of affairs. You can’t have managed
to keep her in the dark about the whole thing?”</p>
<p>“It wasn’t difficult. She looks after certain special
branches of my correspondence and so on; and nothing
except actual Area business passes through her hands, so
she has seen nothing beyond that. And once she finishes
her work for the day I’ve made it a rule for her that she
takes no further interest in the situation. I told her she
must get her mind clear of it at night, or she would get
stale and be no use to me. That was quite enough. She
doesn’t even read the newspapers.”</p>
<p>“But what’s the use of keeping her in the dark? She
is bound to know all about it soon enough.”</p>
<p>“There’s a great difference, Flint, between learning of
a thing after it is irrevocable and hearing of it while there
is time to protest against it. Once a catastrophe is over, it
<i>is</i> over; and the shock is lighter than if one feels it coming
and struggles against it. I don’t wish Miss Huntingtower
to hear anything about the South until the whole thing is
at an end down there. She’ll accept it then, since there
is nothing else for it. I don’t wish her to be put in the
position of feeling that she ought to do all she can to
prevent its coming about. You understand?”</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 class="nobreak"><small>CHAPTER IX</small><br/>


Intermezzo</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">In</span> order to understand the impression which that evening
left upon me, it is necessary to bear in mind the conditions
under which I had been living for the last few weeks. In
the earlier stages I had been oscillating between my office,
with its ever-accumulating mass of papers, on the one hand;
and the grime and clangour of the factories and furnaces
upon the other. Then, gradually, I saw less and less of the
concrete machinery of our safety and slipped almost wholly
into the work of control from a distance. Lists, sheets of
figures, graphs, letters dictated or read, telephonic communications,
reports from factory managers, all surged up before
me in a daily deluge. My meals were eaten hurriedly at a
side-table in my office; and my lights burned far into the
morning in the attempt to cope with the torrent which I
had to control. Often as the dawn was coming up through
the smoke-clouds of the city I walked home with a wearied
mind through which endless columns of figures chased each
other; and my eyes had broken down under the strain to
the extent that I had to use pilocarpine almost constantly.
I was beginning to look back on the old life in London,
with its theatre parties and dinners, as if it were another
existence which I should never re-enter. I seemed shut off
from it by some nebulous yet impenetrable curtain; and
when I thought of it at times, I felt that it had passed away
beyond recall. All the softer side of civilisation, it seemed,
must go down, once for all, in this cataclysm; and from
our efforts a harder, harsher world would be born. Ease and
luxury had vanished, leaving us stripped to our necessities.</p>
<p>And suddenly I found myself in the old surroundings once
more. I was ushered into a room which, though its simplicity
recalled Nordenholt’s other environments, still betrayed
a woman’s hand at every point. There was no litter
of meaningless nicknacks; every touch went to build up a
harmonious whole: and it was unmistakably a feminine
mind which had designed it. As I glanced down the room,
I saw Miss Huntingtower standing by the fireplace; and it
flashed across me that, whether by accident or design, the
room formed a framework for her.</p>
<p>As she came forward to meet me, her smile effaced the
strained expression which I had noticed in the morning. In
these surroundings she seemed different, somehow. The
artistry of the room fitted her own beauty so that each
appeared to find its complement in the other. It seemed to
me that she was designed by destiny for this environment,
and not for the harder work of the world. And yet, she gave
no suggestion of triviality; there was no hint of a feminine
desire to attract. It must have been that she harmonised so
well with the frame in which I saw her. And the personality
which gazed from her eyes seemed in some way to
blend with this world of shaded lights, graceful outlines and
innate simplicity.</p>
<p>Nordenholt came into the room almost at once with a
grave apology to Miss Huntingtower for being late.</p>
<p>“Convenient having a house in the University Square,”
he said to me. “If we hadn’t taken over some of these
professors’ residences, it would have meant such a waste of
time getting to and fro between one’s home and the office.
That was one reason why I selected the University as a
centre. We had the whole thing ready-made for us.”</p>
<p>Henley-Davenport arrived almost at once; and we went
down to dinner. I had begun to re-acclimatise myself in
these surroundings; but I still recall that evening in every
detail. The shaded candles on the table, which soothed my
straining eyes, the glitter of silver and crystal on the snowy
cloth, Nordenholt’s lean visage half in shadow except when
he leaned forward into the soft illumination, Henley-Davenport’s
sharp voice driving home a point, and Miss Huntingtower’s
eager face as she glanced from speaker to speaker or
put a question to one of us: with it all, I seemed back again
in my lost world and the Nitrogen Area appeared to belong
to another region of my life.</p>
<p>But even here it penetrated, though faintly. The usual
topics of conversation were gone: theatres, books, all our
old interests had been uprooted and cast aside, so that we
could only take them up in the form of reminiscence. And,
as a matter of fact, we talked very little about them. I
tried one or two tentative efforts; but Henley-Davenport,
who had known Nordenholt and his ward longer than I,
made very little attempt to follow me: and I soon gathered
that Miss Huntingtower was better pleased with other
subjects.</p>
<p>What appeared to interest her most was the general situation;
and I was rather flattered to find that she seemed
anxious to hear my own views.</p>
<p>She seemed to be one of those people who are gifted with
the faculty of drawing one out. I don’t mean that she sat
silent and merely listened; but she had the knack of stimulating
one to talk and of keeping one to the main line by
occasional questions, which showed that she had not only
followed what had been said but had silently commented
upon it as one went along. Yet she never appeared to lose
her charm by aping masculinity. Her outlook was a
feminine one in its essentials, even if her mind was acute.
And she had the gift of naturalness. There was no
artificiality either in look or speech. She made me feel
almost at once as though I had known her for years.</p>
<p>One thing I did notice about her. Whenever Nordenholt
spoke she seemed to hang on his words and to weigh them
mentally. The two seemed to be joined by some intimate
bond of understanding; and I could see that Nordenholt
was proud of her in his way.</p>
<p>Dinner drew to an end, and Nordenholt began to question
Henley-Davenport about his researches. Miss Huntingtower
interrupted at the beginning with a request for simple
language.</p>
<p>“If you begin talking about uranium-X₁ and meso-thorium-2,
then I won’t understand you, and I want to
know what it is all about.”</p>
<p>“Well, Miss Huntingtower, I think I can make it plain
without using uranium-X₁ or even eka-tantalum; but it’s
hard that I should be forbidden to use all these fine-sounding
words, eh? Isn’t it? I submit under protest. It takes
away half the pleasure of telling things when one has to put
them in mere vulgar English.</p>
<p>“Well”—he had an extraordinary habit of interjecting
“well” and by inflecting it in various ways, making it
serve as a kind of prelude to his sentences, a sort of keynote,
as it were—“Well, I take it that you know what radioactivity
is. Some of the atoms are spontaneously breaking
down into simpler materials, and in that breakdown they
liberate an amount of energy which is immeasurably greater
than anything we can obtain by the ordinary chemical
reactions which occur when coal is burned or when gas is
lighted.</p>
<p>“Well, if we could tap that store of energy which evidently
lies within the atom we should have Nature at our
feet. She would be done for, beaten, out of the struggle:
and we should simply have to walk over the remains and
take what we wanted. Until the thing is actually done,
none of us can grasp what it will mean; for no one has
ever seen unlimited energy under control in this world. We
have always had to fight hard for every unit of it that we
used.</p>
<p>“Well, there is no doubt that atoms <i>can</i> be broken down.
All the radioactive elements split up spontaneously without
any help from us. But the quantities of them which we
can gather together are so extremely minute that as a source
of energy they are feebler than an ordinary wax vesta, for all
practical purposes.</p>
<p>“So far, so good. We know the thing can be done; but
we haven’t hit on the way of doing it. Is that clear?”</p>
<p>“Quite clear, thanks,” said Miss Huntingtower, with a
smile. “Radium without tears, Part I. Now the second
lesson, please.”</p>
<p>“Well, don’t be too optimistic. There may be tears in
the second part. It’s a little stiffer. The majority of the
elements are perfectly stable; they undergo no radioactive
decompositions; so that they give off no energy. But all
the same, if our views are right, they contain a store of
pent-up energy quite as great as that of the radioactive set.
It’s like two clocks, both wound up. One of them, the
radioactive clock, is going all the time and the mainspring
is running down. You know it is going because it gives
out a tick; and we recognise radioactivity by certain tests
of a somewhat similar type, only we ‘listen’ for electrical
effects instead of the sound-waves you detect when the
clock ticks. Now the second clock, the one that is wound
up but hasn’t been started, is like the ordinary element. If
you could give it a shake, it would start off ticking.</p>
<p>“Well, what we want to do is to start the non-radioactive
elements ticking. We are looking for the right kind of
shake to give them in order to start them off. If we can
find that, then we shall get all the energy we need, because
we can utilise enormous quantities of material where now
we have only the traces of radioactive stuff.”</p>
<p>“A risky business,” said Nordenholt. “Your first
successful experiment will be rather catastrophic, won’t
it?”</p>
<p>“Probably. But I’ve left full notes of everything I’ve
done, so someone else will be able to continue if anything
happens to me.</p>
<p>“Well, the real trouble is that it takes a lot to shake up
the internal machinery of an atom. Rutherford did it long
ago by using a stream of alpha-particles from radium to
smash up the nitrogen atom. That was in 1920 or thereabouts.
You see, we have no ordinary force intense enough
to break up atoms of the stable elements; we have to go to
the radioactive materials to get energy sufficiently concentrated
to make a beginning.</p>
<p>“Now, what I have been following out is this. Perhaps
I can show you it best by an experiment. Can you get me
some safety match-boxes?”</p>
<p>A dozen of these were brought, and he stood them each
on its end in a line.</p>
<p>“Now,” he continued, “it requires a certain force in a
blow from my finger to knock down one of these boxes;
and if I take the ten boxes separately, it would need ten
times that force to throw them all flat. But if I arrange
them so that as each one falls it strikes its neighbour, then
I can knock the whole lot down with a single touch. The
first one collides with the second, and the second in falling
upsets the third, and so on to the end of the line.</p>
<p>“Well, that is what I have been following out amongst
the atoms. I know that the alpha-rays of radium will upset
the equilibrium of other atoms; and what is wanted is to
get the second set of atoms to upset a third and so forth.
Hitherto I have not been able to hit upon the proper train
of atoms to use. Somehow it seems to sputter out half-way,
just as a train of powder fails to catch fire all along its line
if one part of it isn’t thick enough to carry the flame on.
But I have got far enough to show that it can be done. It’s
rather pretty to follow, if one has enough imagination to
read behind the measurements. You really must come and
see it, Nordenholt.”</p>
<p>“Do you think it will come out soon?” asked Miss
Huntingtower.</p>
<p>“Sooner or later, is all one can say. But it might come
any day.”</p>
<p>Nordenholt rose from the table.</p>
<p>“I’ll come across now, if you can let me see that
experiment,” he said. “I’m more interested than I can
tell you; and I want to discuss some points with you. I’m
taking the evening off anyway, and I may as well make
myself useful. How long will it take—an hour? All
right. Flint, will you amuse Miss Huntingtower till I
get back?”</p>
<p>He and Henley-Davenport went out, leaving us to return
upstairs.</p>
<p>For a time we talked of one thing and another till at last,
by what transitions I cannot now remember, we touched
upon her secretaryship, and I asked her how she came to
occupy the post.</p>
<p>“Do you really want to know?” she asked. “I warn
you it will be rather a long story if I tell you it; and it will
probably seem rather dull to you.”</p>
<p>“Don’t be afraid. I am sure I shall not find it dull.”</p>
<p>“Well, let’s pretend we are characters in a novel and the
distressed heroine will proceed to relate the story of her life.
‘I was born of poor but honest parents....’ Will that
do to start?”</p>
<p>“Must you begin at the beginning? I usually skip first
chapters myself.”</p>
<p>“I’m sorry, but I have to begin fairly early if you are to
understand. Mr. Nordenholt isn’t my uncle, really, you
know. My father was a distant relation of his. When
Father and Mother died I was quite a tiny child; I only
remember them vaguely now: and Uncle Stanley was the
only relation I had in the world. I believe, too, that I was
the only relative he had, certainly I was the only one I ever
heard him speak of, except Father and Mother. It was just
after he had made his fortune in Canada, and he must have
been about thirty then. It appears that Father had written
to him much earlier, asking him to look after me if anything
happened to him and Mother; and when they were
drowned—it was a boating accident—he came home to
this country and took me to live with him.</p>
<p>“I was only about eight then, and I missed Father and
Mother so. I cried and cried; and he spent hours with me,
trying to comfort me. Somehow he did me good. I don’t
know how he did it; but he seemed to understand so well.”</p>
<p>Again I had come across a new side in Nordenholt’s
character. I could hardly picture that grim figure—for
even at thirty Nordenholt must have been grim—comforting
that tiny scrap of humanity in distress. And yet she
was right: he did understand.</p>
<p>“And with it all, he didn’t spoil me. He knew, of
course, that when I grew up I would have more money
than I knew what to do with; and he determined that I
should get the full pleasure out of it by coming to it unspoilt
and with unjaded feelings. He brought me up in the simplest
way you can imagine. I had no expensive toys, but I liked
the ones I had all the better for that. It gave more scope
for the imagination, you see: and I had even more than the
child’s ordinary imaginative power. When we played fairy
tales together he used to be the Ogre or the Prince
Charming, and I could see him so well either way. He
laughs now when I remind him that he used to make a
good Prince Charming.</p>
<p>“Well, so it went on, year after year; and we grew up
with more in common than either father and daughter or
brother and sister. Somehow I picked up his ways of
looking at things; and I caught from him something of his
understanding of people. He never put any ideals before
me; but I think he himself gave me something to carve out
an ideal from. Oh, there’s nobody like Uncle Stanley! I
don’t know anybody who comes up to his shoulder.”</p>
<p>“I’ve only known him for a few weeks, Miss Huntingtower,”
I said, “but I’ve seen enough to agree with you in
that.”</p>
<p>“Have you? I’m so glad. It shows that we’re the same
sort of person, doesn’t it? For I know some people hate
him—and I hate them for it!”</p>
<p>She clenched her teeth with an air that was half-play,
half-earnest.</p>
<p>“I’m going to skip a few years and come to the fairy-tale
part of my story: the Three Wishes. When I grew up,
Uncle Stanley told me that he had settled an immense sum
on me and that I could do exactly as I wished. I think I
failed him at that point. He expected me to go and have a
good time; and—I didn’t. I didn’t want to have a good
time. I had been thinking over all he had done for me;
and I wanted something else entirely. I wanted to give
him something in return for all his kindness to me when I
was a tiny little thing; and I was afraid that he wouldn’t
let me. I went to him one day and asked him to give me
three wishes. Now even with me, Uncle Stanley is careful;
and he wanted to know what the wishes were before he
would promise.</p>
<p>“‘I don’t know myself yet,’ I said, ‘but I want to feel
that I have three things in reserve that I can ask you to do.’
‘I promise no impossibilities,’ he told me, ‘but if the things
are really possible, you can have them.’ ‘Very well,’ said I,
‘the first of them is that I want to be trained as a secretary.’</p>
<p>“He laughed at me, of course; and when I persisted, he
pointed out to me that I was my own mistress and that I
needn’t have asked his permission to get trained. ‘You’ve
wasted one of your wishes, Elsa,’ he said, ‘and I’m going to
hold you to your bargain.’ ‘Well, I wanted your consent to
it anyway,’ I told him.</p>
<p>“I went and took a secretary’s training, the most complete
I could get. You don’t know how I enjoyed it. I
hated the work, of course; but I felt all the time that I
was getting ready to be of use to Uncle Stanley; and even
the dullest parts of the thing seemed to be lightened by that.</p>
<p>“When I was fully trained, I went to him again. ‘I
want my second wish now: I want you to take me as your
private secretary.’ I don’t know that he was altogether
pleased then. I think he imagined that I would be a
nuisance or inefficient or something. But he kept his
promise and took me to work with him.</p>
<p>“You can’t guess what I felt about it. I worked hard;
I did everything correctly; and I knew him better than
anyone else, so that I could help him just when he needed
it. Of course, I’m not his only secretary; but I know I
suit him better than any of the others. I’ve begun to pay
off my debt to him bit by bit; and yet I always seem just
as deep in as ever. He’s always been so good to me, you
know. But still, I <i>am</i> useful to him; and I’m not merely
there on sufferance now. I know he appreciates my work.”</p>
<p>“I doubt if you would be there long if he didn’t,” I said.
“From what I have seen of him he isn’t likely to employ
amateurs even as a favour. I think he would have let you
see you were useless unless you had made good.”</p>
<p>“Oh, if he had been the least dissatisfied with me I would
have gone at once as soon as I saw it. I want to be a help
and not a hindrance. But now I have answered your
question, although it has taken rather a long time to do it.”</p>
<p>Some inane compliment came to my lips but I bit it back
without speaking it. She didn’t seem to be the sort of girl
who wanted flattery.</p>
<p>“I think you are helping more than Mr. Nordenholt
with your work just now,” I said at length. “You seem
to have found your way into the centre of the biggest thing
this country has ever seen.”</p>
<p>Her face clouded for a moment.</p>
<p>“Yes, it’s a great thing, isn’t it? But do you ever think
what failure might mean, Mr. Flint? Think of all these
poor people starving and of us unable to help them. It
would be terrible. Sometimes I think of it and it makes me
feel that we bear a fearful responsibility. I don’t mean that
I personally have any real responsibility. I don’t take
myself so seriously as all that. But the men at the head,
Uncle Stanley and the rest of you—it’s a fearful burden to
take on your shoulders. I’m only a cog in the machine and
could be replaced to-morrow; but you people, the experts,
couldn’t be replaced. Fifty millions of people! I can’t
even begin to understand what fifty million deaths would
mean. I do hope, oh, I do so hope that we shall be
successful. If anyone but Uncle Stanley were at the head
of it I should doubt; but I feel almost quite safe with him
at the helm. He never failed yet, you know.”</p>
<p>“No,” I said, “he never failed yet.”</p>
<p>What would she think when the full plans of Nordenholt—who
“never failed yet”—were revealed to her? I
wondered how this fragile girl would take it. She wouldn’t
simply weep and forget, I was sure. She seemed to have
high ideals and she evidently idolised Nordenholt. It would
be a terrible catastrophe for her. I dreaded the next steps in
the conversation, for I did not want to lie to her; and I saw
no other way out of it if she turned the talk into the wrong
channel.</p>
<p>Nordenholt’s hour was up and I began to feel that the old
life was slipping away from me again. For a few minutes
we sat silent; for she did not speak and I was afraid to
reopen the conversation lest she should continue her line of
thought. I watched her as she sat: the tiny shoe, the
sweep of the black gown without a sparkle of jewellery to
relieve it, the clean curves of her white throat, and over all
the lustre of her hair. Would there be any place for all this
in the new world? I wondered. Things would be too
hard for her fragility, perhaps.</p>
<p>As ten o’clock struck Nordenholt came in. He looked
more cheerful than when he had left us, though as he
dropped into a chair I noticed that he seemed to be
physically tired.</p>
<p>“Henley-Davenport asked me to make his excuses to
you, Elsa. He wants to work out something which
struck him when we were over at his laboratory; so I left
him there.”</p>
<p>He smoked for a while in silence, as though ruminating
over what he had seen.</p>
<p>“That’s a brave man if you want to see one,” he said at
last. “From what he told me, there will be a terrible
explosion the first time he manages to jar up his atomic
powder-magazine; and yet he goes into the thing as coolly
as though he were lighting a cigarette. I hope he pulls it
off. More hangs on that than one can well estimate just
now. It may be the last shot in our locker for all we
know.”</p>
<p>“But surely, Uncle Stanley, you have foreseen everything?”</p>
<p>“I’m not omniscient, Elsa, though perhaps you have
illusions on the point. I do what I can, but one must
allow a good deal of latitude for the unpredictable which
always exists. And in this affair, I am afraid the unpredictable
will not be on the helping side. But don’t
worry your head over that; we can’t help it. What’s
wrong with you to-night. You look more worried than
usual. Tired?”</p>
<p>“Not specially.”</p>
<p>“Would you sing to us a little?”</p>
<p>“Only something very short, then.” She moved to the
piano. “What do you want?”</p>
<p>“Oh, let’s see.... I’d like.... No, you wouldn’t care
for it. Let’s think again.”</p>
<p>“No, no, Uncle Stanley; I’ll sing anything you wish,”
she said, but when he asked for the second Song in Cymbeline,
her brows contracted.</p>
<p>“Must you have that one? Won’t the first song do
instead?”</p>
<p>“I’d rather have the other. Only the last two verses,
for I see you are tired.”</p>
<p>She sat down at the piano and played the preliminary
chords. I had never heard the air, possibly it was an
unusual setting.</p>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="first">“<i>Fear no more the lightning flash,</i></div>
<div class="indent2"><i>Nor the all-dreaded thunder-stone;</i></div>
<div class="verse"><i>Fear not slander, censure rash;</i></div>
<div class="indent2"><i>Thou hast finished joy and moan:</i></div>
<div class="verse"><i>All lovers young, all lovers must,</i></div>
<div class="verse"><i>Consign to thee, and come to dust.</i>”</div>
</div></div>
<p>It was a wonderful piece of singing. In the first lines her
voice rose clear and confident, reassuring against the mere
physical perils. Then with the faintest change of tone,
just sufficient to mark the shift in the form of menace, she
sang the third line; and let a tinge of melancholy creep
into the next. With the last couplet something new came
into the music, possibly a drop into the minor; and her
voice seemed to fill with an echo of all lost hopes and spent
delights. Then it rose again, full and strong in the mandatory
lines of the final verse, set to a different air, till
at last it died away once more with infinite tenderness:</p>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="first">“<i>Quiet consummation have;</i></div>
<div class="verse"><i>And renownèd be thy grave.</i>”</div>
</div></div>
<p>I sat spellbound after she had ended. It was wonderful art.
She closed the piano and rose from her seat.</p>
<p>“I can’t imagine why you dislike that air,” said Nordenholt.</p>
<p>“Oh, it’s so gloomy, Uncle Stanley. I don’t care to
think about things like that.”</p>
<p>“Gloomy? You misread it, I’m sure. I wish I could
be sure of Fidele’s luck.</p>
<p class="center">‘<i>Fear not slander, censure rash.</i>’</p>
<p>Which of us can feel sure of being free from these? Not I.
And what better could one wish for in the end?</p>
<p class="center">‘<i>And renownèd be thy grave.</i>’</p>
<p>How many ghosts could boast of that after a hundred years?”</p>
<p>“Well, none of us will know about that part of it,” she
said lightly. “But I don’t think you need trouble about the
‘censure rash.’ None of your own people will blame you;
and I know you care nothing for the rest. Even if they all
turned against you, you would always have me, you know.”</p>
<p>“Is that a promise, Elsa?” he asked gravely; and something
in his tone made her glance at him. “Would you
really stand by me no matter what happened? Don’t say
yes, unless you really mean it.”</p>
<p>She stood in front of him, eye to eye, for a moment
without speaking.</p>
<p>“I don’t understand,” she said at last. “You never
doubted me before. It hurts. Of course I promise you.
No matter what happens I won’t leave you. But you must
promise never to send me away until I want to go.”</p>
<p>“Very good, Elsa, I promise.”</p>
<p>The strain seemed to relax in a moment. I don’t think
they realised how strange it all seemed to me. They were
living in their own world, and I was outside, I felt, rather
bitterly. And of course, none of us was quite normal at
that time.</p>
<p>Miss Huntingtower came to me and held out her hand.</p>
<p>“Thanks so much for coming, Mr. Flint. Somehow I
feel as if I had known you for years instead of only a few
hours. Now I’ll say good-night and leave you with Uncle
Stanley.”</p>
<p>“Wait a minute, Elsa,” said Nordenholt. “It seems to
me that all three of us have been cooped up indoors too
much lately. Our nerves are getting on edge. Don’t deny
it, Flint, in your case. You haven’t a leg to stand on. I
heard you differing from one of your clerks to-day. We’d
all be the better for fresh air now and again. One afternoon
a week, after this, we’ll take a car out into the country. I
can do my thinking there just as well as anywhere else; and
Mr. Flint can drive to keep his mind off business. That’s
settled. I told you before that amusement of some sort has
to come into our routine, Flint; so you must just make
up your mind to it. I can’t replace you if you collapse;
so I can’t allow you to go on like this. You don’t look
half the man you were six weeks ago.”</p>
<p>I required no pressing, partly because I knew that Nordenholt
was right in what he said.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 class="nobreak"><small>CHAPTER X</small><br/>


The Death of the Leviathan</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">In</span> this narrative I must give some account of the happenings
in the outer world; for, without this, the picture which
I am attempting to draw would be distorted in its perspective.
At this point, then, I shall begin to interleave the description
of the Northern experiment with sketches of the state of
affairs elsewhere; and later I shall return to the more
connected form of my narrative.</p>
<p>It may reasonably be asked how it comes about that I am
able to give any account at all of occurrences in England
immediately after the closing of the Nitrogen Area, since
I have taken pains to show the complete severance of land-communications
between the two sections of the country.
I have already hinted that all connection between these
regions was not abolished.</p>
<p>Nordenholt feared an invasion of the Clyde Valley by
some, at least, of the multitudes in the South as soon as they
became famine-stricken. It was hardly to be expected that,
with the knowledge of the food in the North which they
had, they would remain quiescent when the pinch came;
and it was essential to have warning of any hostile
movements ere they actually gained strength enough to
become dangerous. For this purpose, he had organised his
Intelligence Department outside as well as within the
Area.</p>
<p>There was no difficulty in introducing his agents into
any district. Night landings by parachute from airships,
or even the daylight descents of an aeroplane on a misty
day, were simple enough to arrange; and his spies could
be picked up again at preconcerted times and places when
their return was desired.</p>
<p>In this way, there flowed into the Nitrogen Area a
constant stream of information which enabled him to piece
together a connected picture of the affairs outside our
frontier.</p>
<p>I have had access to the summaries of these documents;
and it is upon this basis that I have built the next stage
of my narrative. These reports, of course, were not
published at the time.</p>
<p>As to the rest of the world, I have had to depend upon
the wireless messages which were received by the huge
installation Nordenholt had set up; and also upon the
various accounts which have been published in more recent
times.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>I have already mentioned that the last stage of the exodus
involved the destruction, as complete as was practicable, of
roads, railways and telegraphic communications; and I have
mentioned also the breaking-up of newspaper printing
machinery. Following his usual course, Nordenholt had
determined on utilising to the full the psychological factors
in the problem; and it was upon the moral rather than on
the mere physical effect of this disorganisation that he relied
in his planning.</p>
<p>The immediate effect upon the Southern population seems
to have been all that he had hoped. On the morning after
the last night of the exodus, England was still unperturbed.
The absence of the usual newspapers was accepted without
marked astonishment; for no one had any idea that it was
more than a temporary interruption. Each city and town
assumed simply that something had gone wrong in their
particular area. No one seems to have imagined that anything
but a local mishap had occurred. The failure of the
telegraphs was also discounted to some extent.</p>
<p>The local railway services continued to run without
exciting comment by their intermittent character; for
already Grogan’s operations had disorganised them to such
an extent that ordinary time-tables were useless.</p>
<p>The food-supply was still in full swing under the rationing
system which Nordenholt had introduced; and no shortage
had suggested itself to anyone, even among the staffs of the
local control centres.</p>
<p>Thus for at least a couple of days England remained
almost normal, with the exception of the disorganisation
of the communications between district and district. There
was no panic. The population simply went along its old
paths with the feeling that by the end of the week these
temporary difficulties would be overcome and things would
clear up.</p>
<p>The next stage was marked by the increasing difficulty
of communications. Owing to the withdrawal of Grogan
and his staff, simultaneously with the disappearance of the
greater part of the available locomotives into the Nitrogen
Area, the train services fell more and more into disorganisation.
Within a very short time, travel from one part of
the country to another could only be accomplished by the
aid of motors.</p>
<p>The newspapers had been restarted; but they were no
longer the organs to which people had been accustomed.
Printed from presses usually employed for books, they could
not be produced in anything approaching the old quantities;
and the break-up of communications had shattered their
organisation for the collection of information. They were
mere fly-sheets, consisting of two or three leaves of quarto
size at the largest and containing very little general news
of any description. Not only were they printed in small
numbers, but the difficulties of circulating the available
copies were considerable; so that within a very short time
the greater part of the population had to depend upon
information passing orally from one to another.</p>
<p>This was the state into which Nordenholt had planned
to bring them. His agents, proceeding upon a carefully
considered plan, formed centres for the spread of rumours
which grew more and more incredible as they were magnified
by repetition. Hostile invasions, the capture of London, the
assassination of the Premier, anarchist plots, earthquakes
which had interrupted the normal services of the country, all
sorts of catastrophes were invoked to account for the breakdown
of the system under which men had dwelt so long.
But the period of rumours exhausted the belief of the
people. Very soon no one paid any attention to the stories
which, nevertheless, sped across the country in the form of
idle gossip.</p>
<p>Having thus manœuvred the inhabitants of England into
a state of total disbelief in rumour, Nordenholt made his
next move. Hundreds of aeroplanes ranged over the country,
firing guns to attract attention and then dropping showers
of leaflets which were eagerly collected and read. In these
messages from the sky, a complete account was given of the
efforts which were being made in the North to save the
situation. Short articles upon the Nitrogen Area and its
vital importance to the food-supply were scattered broadcast;
and by their clear language and definite figures of
production they carried conviction to the minds of the
readers. Here, at last, was reliable news.</p>
<p>No hint, of course, was given in these aerial bulletins of
the real purpose underlying the Nitrogen Area. Their whole
tone was optimistic; for Nordenholt wished to make his
final blow the heavier by raising hopes at first. Once his
agents had assured him that the people believed implicitly in
his aeroplane news-service, he struck hard.</p>
<p>In my account of his explanation of his breaking-strain
theory, I have indicated roughly the general lines upon
which his attack was based. He had accomplished the
breakdown of the social organism into its component parts
by the interruption of communications throughout the land;
but the final stage of the process was to be the isolation of
each individual from his fellows as far as that was possible.</p>
<p>Suddenly, the news leaflets became charged with a fresh
type of intelligence. At first there was a single item describing
the detection of two cases of a new form of disease
in the Nitrogen Area. Then, in succeeding issues, the
spread of the epidemic was chronicled without comment.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Plague Spreading.</span><br/>
<span class="allsmcap">TWENTY CASES TO-DAY.</span></p>
<p>The next bulletins contained detailed accounts of the
symptoms of the disease, laying stress upon the painful
character of the ailment. It was said in some ways to
resemble hydrophobia, though its course was more prolonged
and the sufferings entailed by it were more severe.</p>
<p>Then further accounts of the extension of the scourge
were rained down from the sky:</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Plague Total: 10,000 Cases.</span><br/>
<span class="allsmcap">NO RECOVERIES.</span></p>
<p>Hitherto the news had confined the Plague to the
Nitrogen Area; and people had not thought it would
spread beyond these limits; but in the next stage of the
propaganda this hope was taken from them. The messages
to Southern England described how the disease had made its
appearance in Newcastle and in Hull; those leaflets intended
for the western districts also gave the same information. In
the North of England, the intelligence took the form of
accounts of the discovery of the plague in London. In every
case, care was taken that there was no direct communication
between the “affected centre” and the spots where the
news was dropped.</p>
<p>The penultimate series of publications was in the form of
lists of precautions to be taken to avoid the disease. It was
described as contagious and not infectious; and people were
advised to avoid mingling with their neighbours as far as
possible. Complete isolation would ensure safety, since it
had been established that the plague was not air-borne.
Horrible details of the sufferings of patients were also
published.</p>
<p>Finally, the last group of leaflets represented a steady
crescendo.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Enormous Spread of Plague in Nitrogen Area.<br/>
100,000 cases.</span><br/>
<br/>
<span class="smcap">Spread of Plague through England.<br/>
only a few districts free.</span><br/>
<br/>
<span class="smcap">Nitrogen Area Decimated.<br/>
population dying in the streets.</span><br/>
<br/>
<span class="smcap">Doom in the Clyde Valley.<br/>
total failure of nitrogen scheme.<br/>
death of nordenholt.</span></p>
<p>The ultimate message was hurriedly printed with blotched
type:</p>
<div class="blockquot">
<div class="hangingindent">
<p><span class="smcap">The Nitrogen Area is almost Uninhabited, the
Remainder of the Population having fled in
Panic. The Plague is Spreading Broadcast over
England and Scotland. Isolate Yourselves,
otherwise Safety is Impossible.</span></p></div></div>
<p>After this had been dropped from the air, the skies remained
empty. No aeroplanes appeared.</p>
<p>Thus, with a stunning suddenness, the population of the
kingdom learned that their hopes were shattered. It is true
that there were still channels of communication open here
and there through which the news might have spread to
contradict the stories from the sky. But Nordenholt had
done his work with demonic certainty. By the very form
of his attack he closed these few remaining routes along
which the truth might have percolated. Strangers were
forbidden to enter any district for fear that they might bring
the Plague with them; and thus each community remained
closed to the outer world. With the increase in the terror,
even neighbouring villages ceased to have any connection
with one another. The Leviathan was dead.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>With this closing of the avenues of communication, the
problem of food-supply became acute. The rations remaining
in each centre were distributed hurriedly and inefficiently
among the population; and then the end was in sight.</p>
<p>I have no wish to dwell upon that side of the story. I
saw glimpses of it, as I shall tell in due course, but all I
need do here is to indicate certain results which flowed
naturally from the condition of things.</p>
<p>When the coal- and food-shortage became acute, the
population divided itself naturally into two classes. On the
one hand were those who, moved either by timidity of new
conditions or a fear of the Plague, fortified themselves in
their dwellings and ceased to stir beyond their doors until
the end overtook them; whilst, on the other, a second
section of the population driven either by despair or
adventurousness, quitted the districts in which it knew there
was no hope of survival and went forth into the unknown
to seek better conditions.</p>
<p>Thus in the ultimate stages of the <i>débâcle</i>, the country
resembled a group of armed camps through which wandered
a floating population of many thousand souls, growing more
and more desperate as they journeyed onward in search of an
unattainable goal. In the movements of this migratory
horde, two main streams could be perceived. Those who
had set forth from the cities knew that no food remained in
the large aggregations of population; and they therefore
wandered ever outward from their starting-point; the
country legions, knowing that the land was barren, fixed
their eyes upon the great centres in the hope that there the
stores of food would still be unexhausted. Both were
doomed to disappointment, but despair drove them on from
point to point.</p>
<p>Of all the centres of attraction, London formed the
greatest magnet to draw to itself these floating and isolated
particles of humanity. Like fragments of flotsam in a whirlpool,
they were attracted into its confines; and once within
that labyrinth, they emerged no more. Lost in its unfamiliar
mazes, they wandered here and there, unable to
escape even if they had wished to do so; and no Ariadne
waited on them with her clue. Perhaps I overrate the
strangeness of the spectacle and lay more stress upon it than
it deserves. It may be that in the depths of the country
even weirder things were done. But London I saw with
my own eyes in the last stages of its career; and I cannot
shake myself free from the impression made upon me by
that uncanny shadow-show beneath the moon.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>Gradually but surely the tide of human existence ebbed
in Britain outside the Nitrogen Area. Here and there in
the central districts there might be isolated patches whereon
some living creatures remained by accident with food
sufficient to prolong their vitality for a little longer; but
after a few months even these were obliterated and the last
survivors of the race of men were to be found clinging to
the coasts of the island where food was still to be procured
from the sea. Some of them struggled through the Famine
period under these conditions; but most of them perished
eventually from starvation; for even in the marine areas
conditions were changing and the old abundant harvest of
sea-creatures had passed away. The herring and other
edible fish were driven to new feeding-grounds. The supply
brought in by the fishing-boats diminished steadily, until at
last men ceased to go out upon the waters and gave up the
struggle. The winter was an exceptionally bitter one—possibly
the change in the surface conditions produced by
<i>B. diazotans</i> affected the world-climate, though that is still
a moot point—and the cold completed the work. Long
before the spring came, Britain was a mere Raft of the
<i>Medusa</i> lying upon the waters and peopled by a handful of
survivors out of what had once been a mighty company.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 class="nobreak"><small>CHAPTER XI</small><br/>


Fata Morgana</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">To</span> explain how I came to witness the spectacle of London
in its extremity, I must go back to the evening at Nordenholt’s
which I have already described. He persisted in his
project of forcing us into the fresh air, often twice or thrice
a week if the weather was favourable; and to tell the truth,
I was nothing loath. Over a hundred hours of my week
were spent in concentrated mental activity under conditions
which removed me more and more from direct contact with
human affairs as time went on; and I looked forward with
pleasure to these brief interludes during which I could take
up once more the threads of my old life and its interests.</p>
<p>Nordenholt himself contributed but little to the conversation
on these excursions. Sometimes he brought with
him one of his numerous experts and spent the time in
technical discussions; but usually he occupied the back seat
of the car alone, lost in his thoughts and plans, while I drove
and Miss Huntingtower sat beside me.</p>
<p>As our time was limited, and we wished to avoid the city
as much as possible, our routes were mainly those to the
west, by the Kilpatrick Hills or the Campsies. We never
pushed farther afield, as Nordenholt had forbidden me to
go outside the boundaries of the Nitrogen Area. I think he
was afraid of what she might see by the roadside if we
passed the frontier.</p>
<p>Even during these few short afternoons, I came to know
her better. Somehow I had got the impression that she
was graver than her years justified; but I found that in this
estimate I was mistaken. She was sobered by the responsibility
of her work, but underneath this she seemed to have
a natural craving for the enjoyment of life, and a capacity
for making the best of things which was suited to my own
mood. She was quite unaffected; I never found her posing
in any way. Whether she chattered nonsense—and I
believe both of us did that at times—or was discussing the
future, she gave me the impression of being perfectly
natural.</p>
<p>We used to make all sorts of plans for the future of
the world, once the danger was past; half-trivial, half-serious
schemes which somehow took on an air of fairy-tale
reality. “When I am Queen, I will set such and such
a grievance right”; “In the first year of my Presidency, I
will publish an edict forbidding so and so.” Between us,
on these drives, we planned a fairy kingdom in the future, a
new Garden of the Hesperides, a dream-built Thelema of
sunlit walls and towers and pleasure-grounds wherein might
dwell the coming generations of men. The future! Somehow
that was always with us. Less and less did we go
backward into the past. That world was over, never to
return; but the years still to come gave us full scope for our
fancies and to them we turned with eager eyes.</p>
<p>The diversion grew upon us as time went on. It was
always spontaneous, for our work gave neither of us an
opportunity for thinking out details; and each afternoon
brought its fresh store of improvisations. Through it all,
she was the dreamer of dreams; it was my part to throw
her visions into a practically attainable form: and gradually,
out of it all, there arose a fabric of phantasy which yet had
its foundations in the solid earth.</p>
<p>It took form; we could walk its streets in reverie and
pace its lawns. And gradually that land of Faerie came
to be peopled with inhabitants, mere phantasms at first, but
growing ever more real as we talked of them between
ourselves. Half in jest and half in earnest we created
them, and soon they twined themselves about our hearts.
Children of our brain, they were; dearer than any earthly
offspring, for from them we need fear no disappointments.</p>
<p>Fata Morgana we christened our City, after the mirage in
the Straits of Messina; for it had that mixture of clear
outline and unsubstantiality which seemed to fit the name.</p>
<p>So we planned the future together out of such stuff as
dreams are made on. And behind us, grim and silent, sat
Nordenholt, the real architect of the coming time.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>He never interrupted our talks; and I had no idea that he
had even overheard them until one day he called me into
his office. He seemed unusually grave.</p>
<p>“Sit down, Jack,” he said, and I started slightly to hear
him use the name, since hitherto I had always been simply
“Flint” to him. “I’ve got something serious to discuss
with you; and it won’t keep much longer.”</p>
<p>He looked up at the great Nitrogen Curve above the
mantelpiece and seemed to brood over the inclinations of
the red and green lines upon it. They were closing upon
one another now, though some distance still separated
them.</p>
<p>“Did it ever occur to you that I can’t go on for ever?”</p>
<p>“Well, I suppose that none of us can go on for ever;
but I don’t think I would worry too much over that,
Nordenholt. Of course you’re doing thrice the work that
I am; but I don’t see much sign of it affecting you yet.”</p>
<p>“Have a good look.”</p>
<p>He swung round to the light so that I could see his face
clearly; and it dawned upon me that it was very different
from the face I had seen first at the meeting in London.
The old masterfulness was there, increased if anything; but
the leanness was accentuated over the cheek-bones and there
was a weary look in the eyes which was new to me. I had
never noticed the change, even though I saw him daily—possibly
because of that very fact. The alteration had been
so gradual that it was only by comparing him with what I
remembered that I could trace its full extent.</p>
<p>“Satisfied, eh?”</p>
<p>“Well, there is a change, certainly; but I don’t think it
amounts to much.”</p>
<p>“The inside is worse than the surface, I’m afraid. But
don’t worry about that. I’ll last the distance, I believe.
It’s what will happen after the finish that is perplexing me
now.”</p>
<p>I muttered something which I meant to be encouraging.</p>
<p>“Well, have it your own way, if you like,” he replied;
“but I <i>know</i>. I have enough energy to see me through
this stage of the thing; but this is only a beginning. After
it, comes reconstruction; and I shall be exhausted by that
time. I can carry on under this strain long enough to see
safety in sight; but someone else must take up the burden
then. I won’t risk doing it myself. I must have a fresh
mind on the thing. So I have to cast about me now for
my successor.”</p>
<p>It was a great shock to hear him speak in this tone.
Somehow I had become so accustomed to look up to
Nordenholt as a tower of strength that it was hard to
realise that there might some day be a change of masters.
And yet, like all his views, this was accurate. When we
reached the other bank, he would have strained himself to
the utmost and would have very few reserves left.</p>
<p>“I’ve been watching you, Jack,” he went on. “I’ve got
fairly sharp ears; and your talks in the car interested me.”</p>
<p>I was aghast at this; for I had believed that these dreams
and plannings were things entirely between Miss Huntingtower
and myself. They certainly were not meant for
anyone else.</p>
<p>“At first,” he went on, “I thought it was only talk to
pass the time; but by-and-by I saw how it attracted you
both. After all, there are worse ways of passing an afternoon
than in building castles in the air. But what I liked
about your castles was that they had their roots in the
earth. You have a knack of solid building, Jack, even in your
dreams. It’s a rare gift, very rare. I felt more friendly to
you when I followed all that.”</p>
<p>There was no patronage in his tone. As usual, he seemed
to be stating what appeared to him an obvious conclusion.</p>
<p>“The upshot is,” he went on, “that I’m going to dismiss
you from your present post and put you in charge of a new
Department dealing with Reconstruction. There will be
one condition—or rather two conditions—attached to it;
but they aren’t hard ones. Will you take it?”</p>
<p>Of course I was taken completely aback. I had never
dreamed of such a thing; and I hardly knew what to say.
I stammered some sort of an acceptance as soon as I could
find my voice.</p>
<p>“Very good. You cut loose from your present affairs
from this moment. Anglesey will take over. You can
give him all the pointers he asks for to-day; and after that
he must fend for himself. I’ll have no two minds on that
line of work.</p>
<p>“Now as to the new thing. It will make you my
successor, of course; and I want to start with a word of
warning. Unlimited power is bad for any man. You have
only to look at the example of the Cæsars to see that:
Caligula, Tiberius, Nero, you’ll find the whole sordid
business in Suetonius. And I can tell you the same thing
at first hand myself. I’ve got unlimited power here nowadays;
and it isn’t doing me any good. I feel that I am
going downhill under it daily. You’ll probably see it
yourself before long, although I’ve fought to keep it in
check. So much for the warning.</p>
<p>“Now as to the conditions. I admired your dream-cities,
Jack. I wish you could build them all in stone. But even
if you were to do that, they would still have to be peopled;
and I doubt if you will find the men and women whom you
want for them among the present population. Mind you, I
believe you have good material there; but it has a basis
in the brute which none of your dream-people had. You
don’t realise that factor; you couldn’t understand its
strength unless you saw it actually before you: and my
first condition is meant to let you see the frailty with which
you will have to contend and which you will have to
eliminate before you can see that visionary race pacing the
gardens in your Fata Morgana. It’s all in full blast within
five hundred miles of here. London is thronged with
people just the same as those down there in the factories;
and I want you to see what it amounts to when you take
off the leash. So the first condition is that you go down to
London and see it with your own eyes. I could prepare
you for it from the reports I have; but I think it will be
better if you see it for yourself and don’t trust to any other
person. I’ll make all the arrangements; and you can
leave in a couple of days.”</p>
<p>I am no enthusiast for digging into the baser side of
human nature, and the prospect which he held out was
not an inviting one to me. But I could see that he laid
stress upon it, so I merely nodded my consent.</p>
<p>“Now the second condition. I daresay that you alone
could plan a very good scheme of reconstruction; but it
would be a pure male scheme. You can’t put yourself
in any woman’s place and see things with her eyes, try
as you will. But this Fata Morgana of yours, when it
rises, has to be inhabited by both men and women; and
you have to make it as fit for the women as for the men.
That’s where you would collapse.”</p>
<p>“I suppose you’re right. I don’t know much about a
woman’s point of view. I never had even a sister to
enlighten me.”</p>
<p>“Quite so. I judged as much from some things. Well,
my second condition is that you take over Elsa as a
colleague. It was hearing the two of you talk that gave
me the idea of using you, Jack; so it is only fair that
she should have a share in the thing also.”</p>
<p>“But would Miss Huntingtower leave you?”</p>
<p>“I’ll try to persuade her. Anyway, leave it to me. But
remember, Jack, not a word to her about London or the
South. She knows nothing of that yet. I’ve kept her
work confined entirely to Area affairs. I want to spare
her as long as I can; for she’ll take it hard when it comes.
She’ll take it very hard, I’m afraid. Until you’re back
from London I shall say nothing to her about your being
away, lest she asks where you have gone.”</p>
<p>I was still dazzled by the promotion he had promised
me; and I thanked him for it, again and again. When I
left him, my mind was still full of it all. I don’t know
that I felt the responsibility at first; it was rather the
chance of bringing things nearer to that dream-city which
we had built upon the clouds, that I felt most strongly.
I had no doubt that I could lay the foundations securely;
and upon them Elsa could build those fragile upper courses
in which she delighted. It would be our own Fata Morgana,
but reared by human hands.</p>
<p>So I dreamed....</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 class="nobreak"><small>CHAPTER XII</small><br/>


Nuit Blanche</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">The</span> aeroplane which carried me southward alighted on
the Hendon flying-ground when dusk was falling. As we
crossed Hertfordshire I had seen in front of me, to the
south-east, a great pall of cloud which seemed to hang
above the city; and as the daylight faded, this curtain
became lit up with a red glow like the sky above a blast-furnace.</p>
<p>When we landed, I found that all arrangements had already
been made by Nordenholt; for after I had removed my flying
kit an untidy-looking, unshaven man made his appearance,
who introduced himself as my guide for the night. He
advised me to have a meal and try to snatch a little sleep
before we started. We dined together in one of the buildings—for
Nordenholt had spared the Hendon aerodrome
in the general destruction of the exodus, though he had
burned all the aeroplanes which were there at the time—and
during the meal my guide gave me hints as to my
behaviour while I was under his charge, so that I might
not attract attention under the new conditions. Above all,
he warned me not to show any surprise at anything I
might see.</p>
<p>After I had dozed for a time, he reappeared and insisted
on rubbing some burnt cork well into my skin under the
eyes and on my cheeks, and also giving my hands and the
rest of my face a lighter treatment with the same medium.</p>
<p>“You look far too well-fed and clean to pass muster
here. There’s very little soap left now; and most of us
don’t shave. Must make you look the part.”</p>
<p>He handed me two ·45 Colt pistols and a couple of loaded
spare magazines.</p>
<p>“Shove these extra cartridges into a handy pocket as well.
The Colts are loaded and there’s an extra cartridge in the
breech of each. That gives you eighteen shots without
reloading; and sixteen more when you snick in the fresh
magazines. You know how to do it? Pull down the
safety catches. If you have to shoot, shoot at once; and
shoot in any case of doubt. Don’t stop to argue.”</p>
<p>A motor-car was waiting for us with two men in the front
seats. The glass of the wind-screen bore a small square of
paper with a red cross printed on the white ground; and I
saw that one of the side-light glasses had been painted a
peculiar colour. My guide and I climbed into the back
seats and the car moved off. When we passed out of the
aerodrome I observed that the entrance was defended by
machine-guns; and a large flag of some coloured bunting
was flown on a short staff. As it waved in the air, I
caught the letters “PLAGUE” on it.</p>
<p>“To keep off visitors,” said my guide. “By the way,
my name’s Glendyne. Oh, by Jove, I’ve forgotten something
important.”</p>
<p>He took out of the door-pocket a couple of armlets
with the Red Cross on them and fastened one on my left
arm, putting the other one on himself. I gathered that they
formed part of his disguise.</p>
<p>It was night now. The sky was clear except for some
clouds on the horizon and the full moon was up, so that we
hardly needed the head-lights to see our way. Again I
noticed the peculiar red glow which I had seen from the
aeroplane; but now, being nearer, I saw flickerings in it.
There were no artificial lights, either of gas or electricity,
in the streets through which we passed. Very occasionally
I saw human forms moving in the distance; but they were
too far off for me to distinguish what sort of person was
abroad. In the main, the figures which I espied were
reclining on the ground, some singly, others in groups;
and for a time I did not realise that these were corpses.</p>
<p>We soon diverged from the main road and drove through
a series of by-streets in which I lost my sense of direction
until at last I discovered that we were passing the old
Cavalry Barracks in Albany Street.</p>
<p>“Halt!”</p>
<p>The car drew up suddenly and in the glare of our head-lights
I saw a group of men carrying rifles and fixed
bayonets; bandoliers were slung across their shoulders, but
otherwise there was no sign of uniform.</p>
<p>“Where’s your permit?... Doctor’s car, is it? We’ve
been taken in by that once before. Never again, thank
you. Out with that permit if you have it, or it will be the
worse for you.”</p>
<p>The armed group covered us with their rifles while
Glendyne searched in his pocket. At last he produced a
paper which the leader of the patrol examined.</p>
<p>“Oh, it’s you, Glendyne? Sorry to trouble you, but
we can’t help it. A medical car came through the other
night and played Old Harry with a patrol at Park Square;
so we have to be careful, you see. I think it was some of
Johansen’s little lot who had stolen a Red Cross car.
Stephen got them with a bomb at Hanover Gate later
in the evening and there wasn’t enough left to be sure
who they were. Why they can’t leave this district alone
beats me. They have most of London left to rollic in; and
yet they must come here where no one wants them. By
the way, where are you going?”</p>
<p>“Leaving the car at Wood’s Garage. Going down to
the Circus on foot after that, I think; probably via Euston,
though.”</p>
<p>“All right. I’ll telephone down. Sanderson’s patrol is
out there in Portland Place and he might shoot you by
accident. I’ll get him to look out for you on your way
back.”</p>
<p>“Thanks. Very good of you, I’m sure.”</p>
<p>Our car ran forward again to the foot of Albany Street,
where we turned in to a large public garage.</p>
<p>“What was that patrol?” I asked Glendyne.</p>
<p>“Local Vigilance Committee. Some districts have them.
Trying to keep out the scum and looters.”</p>
<p>“But what about this being a medical car?”</p>
<p>“I <i>am</i> a medical. Was an asylum doctor before Nordenholt
picked me out for this job. Medical cars can go
anywhere even now; but we can do better on foot for the
particular work you want to-night.”</p>
<p>He seemed to be a man of few words; but I had been
struck by the empty state of the garage and wished to know
where the usual multitude of cars had gone.</p>
<p>“Most owners took their machines away in the rush out
of London. Any cars left were looted long ago. Have to
leave a guard now on any car, otherwise we’d have the
petrol stolen before we were back. You’ll see later.”</p>
<p>There were no lights burning in the Euston Road, either
in the streets or at house-windows. Coming in the car, I
had given little heed to the lack of passers-by; but here, in
a district which swarmed with population in the old days, I
could not help being struck by the change of atmosphere.
All inhabitants seemed to have vanished, leaving not a trace.
I asked Glendyne if this region was entirely deserted; but
he explained to me that in all probability there were still a
number of survivors.</p>
<p>“No one shows a light after dark in a house if they can
help it,” he said. “It simply invites looters.”</p>
<p>“The full moon stood well above the house-tops, lighting
up the streets far ahead of us. Wheeled traffic seemed
non-existent; nor could I see a single human being. Just
beyond the Tube Station, however, I observed what I took
to be a bundle of clothes lying by the roadside. Closer
inspection proved it to be a complete skeleton dressed in a
shabby suit of serge. While I was puzzling over this,
Glendyne, seeing my perplexity, gave me the explanation.”</p>
<p>“Looking for the flesh, I suppose? Gone long ago.
<i>B. diazotans</i> takes care of that, or we should have had a real
Plague instead of a fake one, considering the number of
deaths there have been. As soon as life goes out, all flesh is
attacked by bacteria, but <i>B. diazotans</i> beats the putrefying
bacteria in quick action. You’ll find no decaying corpses
about. Quite a clean affair.”</p>
<p>Leaving the skeleton behind us, we continued our way.
I suppose if I had been a novelist’s hero I should have
examined the pockets of the man and discovered some
document of priceless value in them. I must confess the
idea of searching the clothes never occurred to me till long
afterwards; and I doubt if there was anything useful in
them anyway.</p>
<p>As we walked eastwards towards Euston I noticed that
the red glow before us was shot now and again with a
tongue of flame. We passed several isolated corpses, or
rather skeletons, and suddenly I came upon a group of them
which covered most of the roadway. I noticed that all the
heads pointed in one direction and that the greater number
of the dead had accumulated on the steps of a looted public-house.
Noticing my astonishment, Glendyne condescended
to explain.</p>
<p>“Crawled there at the last gasp looking for alcohol to
brace them up for another day, I expect. See the attitudes?
All making for the door. Hopeless, anyway. The stuff
must have been looted long before they got near it. Curious
how one finds them like that, all clustered together, either
at the door of a pub or the porch of a church. A Martian
would think that drink and religion were the only things
which attracted humanity in the end.”</p>
<p>It was near Whitfield Street that I saw a relic of the
exodus from London. Two cars, a limousine and a big
five-seater, had collided at high speed; for both of them
were badly wrecked, and the touring-car had been driven
right across the pavement and through a shop-front. To
judge from the skeletons in the limousine, its passengers had
been killed by the shock.</p>
<p>Leaving this scene of disaster, we walked eastward again.
I glanced up each side-street as I passed, but there were no
signs of living beings. In the stillness, our footsteps rang
upon the pavements; but the noise attracted no one to our
neighbourhood. It was not until we reached the corner of
Tottenham Court Road that I was again reminded of my
fellow-men. A sound of distant singing reached my ears:
fifty or a hundred voices rising and falling in some simple
air which had a strangely familiar ring, though I could not
recall exactly what it reminded me of at the time. The
singers were far off, however; for when we halted at the
street-corner I could see no one in Tottenham Court Road;
and we went on our way once more.</p>
<p>The notice-boards at the gate of Euston Station were
covered with recently-posted bills; and seeing the word
PLAGUE in large letters upon some of them I halted for a
moment to read the inscriptions. They were all of a kind:
quack advertisements of nostrums to prevent the infection or
to cure the disease. I was somewhat grimly amused to find
that there was still a market for such trash even amid the
final convulsion of humanity. The only difference between
them and their fore-runners was that instead of money the
vendors demanded food in exchange for their cures. Flour,
bread, or oatmeal seemed to be the currency in vogue.</p>
<p>The station itself was dark; but here and there in the
Hotel windows glowed with lamp or candle-light. “Probably
some select orgy or other,” was Glendyne’s explanation;
and he refused to investigate further. “No use
thrusting oneself in where one isn’t wanted. In these times
the light alone is a danger signal when you know your way
about.”</p>
<p>It was in Endsleigh Gardens that we came across another
living creature. Half-way along, I caught sight of a figure
crouching in a doorway. At first I took it for a skeleton;
but as we drew near it rose to its feet and I found that it
was a man, indescribably filthy and with a matted beard.
When he spoke to us, I detected a Semitic tinge in his
speech.</p>
<p>“Give me some food, kind gentlemen! Jahveh will
reward you. A sparrow, or even some biscuit crumbs?
Be merciful, kind gentlemen.”</p>
<p>“Got none to spare,” said Glendyne roughly.</p>
<p>“Ah, kind gentlemen, kind gentlemen, surely you have
food for a starving man? See, I will pay you for it. A
sovereign for a sparrow? <i>Two</i> sovereigns for a sparrow?
Listen, kind gentlemen, five pounds for a rat—eight pounds
if it is a fat one. I could make soup with a rat.”</p>
<p>“There’s no food here for you.”</p>
<p>“But, gentlemen, you don’t understand; you don’t
understand. I can make you rich. Gold, much fine gold,
for a miserable sparrow—or a rat! You think I am too
poor to have gold? You despise me because I am clothed
in rags? What are rags to me, who am richer than
Solomon? I can pay; I can pay.”</p>
<p>He kept pace with us, shuffling along in the gutter; and
I noticed that the sole of one of his boots flapped loose at
each step he took. After glancing around suspiciously as
though afraid of being overheard, he continued in a lower
tone:</p>
<p>“Jahveh has laid a great task upon me. I can <i>make</i>
gold! Give me food, even the smallest scrap, and you shall
be richer than Solomon. All that your hearts desire shall
be yours, kind gentlemen. Apes, ivory, peacocks and the
riches of the East shall come to you. I will give you gold
for your palaces and you shall deck them with beryl and
chrysoberyl, sapphire, chrysolite and sardonyx. Diamonds
shall be yours, and the stones of Sardis.... These do not
tempt you? I curse you by the bones of Isaac! May all
the burden of Gerizim and Ebal fall upon you!”</p>
<p>He broke off, almost inarticulate with rage; then, mastering
himself, he continued in a calmer tone.</p>
<p>“A few crumbs of bread, kind gentlemen; even the
scrapings of your pocket-linings. Or a sparrow? Think
what can be bought with my gold. Slaves to your desire,
concubines of the fairest, brought from all the parts of the
world, whose love is more than wine....”</p>
<p>It enraged me to hear this filthy object profaning all the
material splendours of the world; and I thrust him aside
roughly. My movement seemed to bring his suppressed
anger to its climax.</p>
<p>“You doubt me? You will not hear the word of
Jahveh’s messenger? See, I will make gold before you;
and then you shall fall down and offer me all the food you
have—for I know you have food. Look well, O fools; I
will make gold for you this moment.”</p>
<p>He stooped down as though lifting something invisible in
handfuls and then made the motion of throwing.</p>
<p>“See! My gold! I throw it abroad. Look how it
glitters in the light of the moon. Hear how it tinkles as it
falls upon the pavement. There”—he pointed suddenly—“see
how the coins spin and run upon the ground. Gold!
Much fine gold! Is it not enough? Then here is more.”</p>
<p>He repeated his motion of lifting something, this time
with both hands as though he were delving in loose sand.</p>
<p>“See! Gold dust! I throw it; and it falls in showers.
I scatter it; and there is a golden cloud about us. I give it
all to you, kind gentlemen. Surely all this is worth a rat,
a fat one; a rat to make soup?”</p>
<p>He looked at us expectantly, holding out his empty hands
as though they contained something which he wished us to
examine.</p>
<p>“Still you are not convinced? Not so much as a sparrow
for all this gold? I have fallen amid a generation of vipers.
Ha! You would rob me of my gold; you would take it
all and give me not so much as a rat? But I shall escape
you. Even now I go to prepare the streets of the new
Jerusalem. Jahveh has commanded me that I make them
ready with my finest gold. He has prepared the smelting-furnace
here in this city; it burns with fire; and I have
but to lay my gold in its streets so that they shall all be
covered. I go! Gold! Gold!”</p>
<p>He ran from us; and we heard his voice in Gordon
Street crying “Gold! Gold!” as he went.</p>
<p>After he had left us, we came by Upper Woburn Place
into Tavistock Square; and it was here that I met the first
<i>petroleuse</i>. Some houses were burning in Burton Crescent.
Suddenly at the corner of the entry I saw a figure appear, an
oldish woman in rags, carrying a petrol tin and a dipper.
She hobbled along, throwing liquid from her tin at every
house-door as she passed. Sometimes she broke a window
and threw petrol into the room beyond. I lost sight of her
when she turned into Burton Street; but she soon reappeared,
having evidently exhausted her stores. She now
carried an improvised torch in her hand with which she set
fire to the petrol spilled about the doors on her previous
passage. Soon each doorway was a mass of flames; and she
retired into Burton Crescent, with a final glance to see that
her work had been well done.</p>
<p>“That sort of thing is going on all over the East End
now,” said Glendyne, “and you see that it is spreading
westward too. It began by the East Enders running out of
coal. Then they took to lighting bonfires in the streets
with wood from the houses, to keep themselves warm.
And finally houses caught fire and they got the taste for
destruction. You’re seeing the last of London. There are
no fire-brigades now. It’s only a question of time before
the whole city is ablaze.”</p>
<p>Russell Square was dark like all the rest of the streets;
but the moon lit it up sufficiently for us to see what was
going on in Southampton Row, where a band of men were
engaged in breaking into a druggist’s shop.</p>
<p>“What do they expect to find there?” I asked. “It
doesn’t seem very promising from the looter’s point of
view.”</p>
<p>“Cocaine and morphia, of course,” Glendyne replied,
“or ether to get drunk on, if they aren’t very sophisticated.
They’ll do anything to keep down hunger pangs nowadays,
you know.”</p>
<p>We crossed the south side of Russell Square, making for
Montague Street, when my attention was attracted by the
sound of singing which I had previously heard in Tottenham
Court Road. The voices were nearer this time; and I was
able to make out one line of the song:</p>
<p class="center">“<i>Here we go dancing, under the Moon....</i>”</p>
<p>“What’s that?” I asked Glendyne.</p>
<p>“What? Oh, that? Some of the Dancers, I expect.
We’ll come across them later on, no doubt. Nothing to
be alarmed about. Come along!”</p>
<p>Just as we were moving on, however, at the turning into
Montague Street there came a soft whirring behind us; a
great limousine car drew up at the kerb; and from its
interior descended a tall figure which approached us. As
he drew near, I saw in the moonlight that it was a thin
and white-haired man, showing no signs of the usual grime.
He seemed a gentle old man, out of place in this city of
nightmare; but as I looked more closely into his face I could
see something abnormal in his eyes.</p>
<p>“You will excuse me for interrupting you, gentlemen;
but I wish to put an important question to you. What is
Truth?”</p>
<p>Glendyne gave an impatient snarl in reply. Probably he
was completely <i>blasé</i> by this time; and took little interest
in the vagaries of the human mind. As for myself, I was
so taken aback by this latest comer that I could only stare
without answering.</p>
<p>The old man looked at us eagerly for a moment; then
disappointment clouded his face and he turned back to his
car. We watched him without speaking as he stepped into
it. The chauffeur drove on, leaving us as silently as he had
come.</p>
<p>When we reached the great gates of the British Museum,
I was somewhat surprised to find them standing wide. I
suppose that even amid the abnormalities of this new London
my memory was working upon its old lines, and it seemed
strange to see this entrance open at that time of night. To
my astonishment, Glendyne turned into the court.</p>
<p>“I just want to show you a curious survival in the
Reading Room here.”</p>
<p>Inside the building, all was dark; but by the light of an
electric torch we found our way to the back of the premises.
The Reading Room was dotted here and there with tiny
lights like stars in the gloom; and within each nimbus I
saw a face bent in the study of a volume.</p>
<p>“Still reading, you see,” said Glendyne. “Even in the
last crash some of them are eager for knowledge. How
they find the books they want passes my comprehension;
for, of course, there is no one left to give them out. But
they seem able to pick out what they need from the shelves.”</p>
<p>He threw his flashlight here and there in the gloom,
lighting up figure after figure. Some of them turned and
gazed toward us with dazzled eyes; but others continued
their reading without paying us any attention. It reminded
me of a glimpse into the City of Dreadful Night; but it
seemed better than the things we had met in our wanderings
outside. After all, there was something almost heroic in
this vain acquirement of learning at a moment when human
things seemed doomed to destruction.</p>
<p>As we emerged from the Museum, it seemed to me that
the glare of the flames in the sky was brighter; but this
may have been due merely to the increased sensitiveness of
my retina after the darkness within the building. We turned
to the right and followed Great Russell Street westwards.</p>
<p>We crossed Oxford Street and turned down Charing
Cross Road. At the lower end of the street, houses were
burning furiously, and I could hear the sound of the fires
and the crash of falling girders. Beyond Cambridge Circus
the road was impassable. Sutton Street seemed to be the
only way left to us. As we came into it, I noticed that the
dead were much more numerous here and that many of them
held clasped in their skeleton hands a crucifix or a rosary.</p>
<p>“Making their way to St. Patrick’s when they died,”
Glendyne explained to me. As we came closer to the
church, we found living mingled with the dead. Some
of them were so feeble that they could crawl no further;
but others were still making efforts to drag themselves
nearer to the door. Organ music came from the porch,
and I halted amid the dead and dying to listen to the voices
of the choir:</p>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="first">“<i>Dies irae, dies illa</i></div>
<div class="verse"><i>Solvet saeclum in favilla....</i>”</div>
</div></div>
<p>It was weirdly apposite, there in the centre of that burning
city. Then the choir continued:</p>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="first">“<i>Tuba mirum spargens sonum</i></div>
<div class="verse"><i>Per sepulchra regionum</i></div>
<div class="verse"><i>Coget omnes ante thronum.</i>”</div>
</div></div>
<p>Hardly had the thunder of the great vowels died away when
from the crowd around us came a bitter cry, the sound of
some soul in its agony. It startled me; and as I turned
round, there ran a movement through that multitude of
dead and dying, as though in very truth the trumpets had
called the dead to life and judgment. The cry had been
heard within the church; for a priest came to the porch
and blessed them. It seemed to bring comfort to those
alive.</p>
<p>“Let’s get out of this,” I said to Glendyne. “We can’t
help; and it’s needless to stay here. I can’t stand it.”</p>
<p>“All right,” he said philosophically. “Personally, I don’t
mind this so much as some of the other things one sees.
These people, you know, by their way of it, have put
themselves under the protection of the Church. Their
path is clear. There’s only Death now for them, and, after
all, each of us comes to that in his own time. <i>They</i> will go
out with easy minds.”</p>
<p>As we came into Soho Square, I was reminded of the
fact that even in this city of the dying, human passions still
remained. From Greek Street came the sound of revolver
shots: three in rapid succession, evidently a duel, and then
a gasping cry, followed by a final shot. Then silence for
a moment; and at last the noise of heavy foot-falls dying
away in the direction of Old Compton Street.</p>
<p>“What’s that?”</p>
<p>“How should I know?” Glendyne retorted. “Probably
some of the foreign scum settling a difference among themselves.
We never bother about this district. Too dangerous
to poke one’s nose into. If I were to go and try to help,
I’d most probably get shot for my pains. One gets to
know one’s way about, after a time. A few weeks ago I
tried the Good Samaritan on one of these foreigners and
he almost succeeded in knifing me for my pains. I suppose
he thought I was one of his friends come to finish the job.
He was shot through the lung anyway, so I don’t suppose I
could have helped much, even if I had persisted.”</p>
<p>Soho Square was deserted. The mingled red and silver
light from the burning houses and the moon lay across it;
but nothing moved. We turned northward into Soho
Street. It also was empty when we entered it; but while
we walked up it a figure entered it from the Oxford Street
end. As it approached, Glendyne made a gesture of
recognition, and when the two met it was evident that
they were well acquainted with one another.</p>
<p>“That you, Glendyne? Glad to see you again. It’s a
week since we met, I think.”</p>
<p>It was a tall thin clergyman with a clear-cut ascetic face,
clean-shaven in spite of the prevailing lack of soap. For
the first time that night I saw that the city had thrown
up a man who was definitely sane. His keen glance, his
air of competence and his matter-of-fact mode of speech
were in strong contrast to what I had become accustomed
to expect from the inhabitants of this Inferno. Glendyne
introduced me with some perfunctory words which left my
presence unexplained; and the clergyman seemed to accept
me without comment.</p>
<p>“Things are going from bad to worse, Glendyne,” he
said. “I’m sometimes tempted to take advantage of your
offer and clear out some of these places with a bomb or
two.”</p>
<p>“What’s wrong now?” Glendyne inquired, without
much apparent interest.</p>
<p>“Well, I can stand a good deal—have had to, you know.
But when it comes to open idolatry in the West End, I
must say I begin to draw the line.”</p>
<p>“Remember two can play at that game, if you <i>do</i> begin.
If you interfere with them, they will interfere with you.”</p>
<p>“Of course, you’re quite right. So far we have had no
persecution; I’ll say that for them. But sometimes temptation
is as bad as persecution, or even worse. Persecution
couldn’t last long now anyway; and it would only knit
us together: but temptation is a different matter. I’ve lost
two girls in the last three days—enticed away by the
Dancers. Sickening business, for one knows how that
always ends. One of them was taken from my side as
we were walking along the street together; and I was
jammed in the crowd and could do nothing. She just
cracked up, got hysterical and darted off. I lost sight of
her almost at once. Of course she never came back.
Damn them!” he ended with extraordinary bitterness.</p>
<p>“Well, it can’t be helped. You do all that a man can
do to keep them sane; and if you fail, it’s no fault of
yours.”</p>
<p>“What has that to do with it?” cried the clergyman
vehemently. “Do you think I care one way or another
for that? It’s the sight of these souls going down to
damnation that I care about. In a few days we must all
meet our Judge, and these poor things go before Him soiled
in body and soul! <i>That’s</i> what hurts, Glendyne. Six
months ago we were all living a normal life; I was preaching
the Gospel and doing my best to bring light into these
people’s lives. I doubt I was slack in some ways, knowing
what I do now. I didn’t realise the gulfs in the darkness
through which we walked in this world. I knew very little
of the horrors lurking under the surface. And now comes
this outpouring of Hell! I used to think one should cover
up all the worst in life, keep it from one’s eyes. Perhaps
if I had known more, I might have been of more use now.
But at first I didn’t know. I didn’t recognise the forms
under which temptation could come. Half my flock had
fallen before I had opened my eyes to what was happening.
Think of that! My sheer ignorance of life, look what it
has cost!”</p>
<p>“Well, well,” said Glendyne. “No use crying over spilt
milk, is there? You did your best according to your lights.
You weren’t trained as a mental specialist, you know.”</p>
<p>“Thanks so much, Bildad Redivivus, but I’m afraid your
argument helps no more nowadays than it did a few thousand
years ago in the Land of Uz. I <i>ought</i> to have known better;
but I shut my eyes. I thought these things unclean and
despised them; and now they have ruined my work because
I did not take the trouble to understand them.</p>
<p>“You can’t guess what it is like now, Glendyne. They
are celebrating the Black Mass in Hyde Park and holding
Witches’ Sabbaths. All the old evil things which we
thought had died out of the race have reappeared, all the
foulest practices and superstitions have come to life. It’s
terrible.”</p>
<p>“The old gods were never dead, although you pretended
they were. Now they have come again, you have got to
make the best of it. It’s not for long, anyway. Another
week or two and the last food will be gone.”</p>
<p>“I pray for that day, Glendyne. I never thought to see
it; but I go on my knees many times daily and pray that
it may come soon. Some of my people I know will be
stedfast; but the contagion attacks the younger ones with
an awful swiftness.”</p>
<p>“Collective hysteria. I know. Keep them indoors as
much as possible, especially the girls. You can do nothing
more.”</p>
<p>“I suppose not. Anyway, I’ll do what I can, if only I
can hold out till the end myself. And to think that once
I used to imagine that a minister’s life circled round through
sermons, prayer-meetings and visiting the sick! Why, I
didn’t know the beginnings of it!”</p>
<p>“Don’t worry about the past. I’m speaking as a medico
now. Get on with your work and leave the thinking till
you have time for it. Eternity’s pretty long, you know.”</p>
<p>“Well, if I take your advice I must be getting back to
my work. Good-night, both of you. I’ll see you next
week again, perhaps, Glendyne.”</p>
<p>He walked on, leaving us to continue our exploration.
Glendyne was silent for some minutes. When at last he
spoke, it was in a graver tone than I had heard him use
before.</p>
<p>“That’s a splendid chap,” he said, looking back over his
shoulder at the tall figure behind us. “I don’t envy him,
though. His awakening has been a rude one in this affair.
Six months ago he knew absolutely nothing of life. He
was earnest and all that; but a perfect child in things of
the world. The result was that when the blow came he
was absolutely helpless. He fought for a time with the old
platitudes—and he fought well, I can tell you, for he has
a tremendous personality. But he was out of court from
the first. I’ve seen things done under his very eyes without
his even noticing what was happening. At last I gave him
a few pointers from my own experience; and now he has
some vague ideas what the temptations really are and how
he can best counter them. And he works like a Trojan.
A splendid chap. What a chance he has, if he had only
had the knowledge; and how he regrets it now, poor beggar.
You know, at the very first, he simply led his people down
the slope without knowing it. Worked up their religious
emotion, you see, until they were simply gunpowder for
the flame. What a mess! And all with the best intentions
too.”</p>
<p>It was an extraordinarily long speech from Glendyne;
and it gave me some measure of his liking for the clergyman.
I gathered that they often met in the course of their
work.</p>
<p>By this time we had emerged into Oxford Street. Glendyne
was about to cross the road, when suddenly he caught
sight of a train of figures, about a hundred and fifty in all,
I should say, who were advancing up the middle of the
street. Each had his hands on the shoulders of the person
in front of him and the procession advanced towards us
slowly, whilst I heard again the air with which I had
become familiar.</p>
<p>“The Dancers!” muttered Glendyne. “Keep a grip
on yourself, now, Flint. No hysteria, if you please.”</p>
<p>I was angry at being treated in this way, for I am not
an hysterical subject either outwardly or inwardly; but as
the procession drew nearer I realised that he was right
to give me a sharp warning. They advanced slowly, as I
said, keeping time to the air which they sang and which
I now recognised as being something like one of the old
nursery lullabies I heard when I was a child. It had the
knack of penetrating far into one’s subconsciousness and
bringing up into the light all sorts of forgotten childish
fancies which had long slipped from my waking thoughts.
There was no regularity in the dancing, except that the
whole procession kept time to the air: each individual
danced as he chose, provided that he kept his hands upon
the shoulders before him so that the line remained intact.
Men and women were intermingled without any order in
the company. Their faces were rapt, as though in some
ecstasy; and a strange, compelling magnetism seemed to
emanate from the whole scene.</p>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="first">“<i>Here we go ... dancing ... under the ... Moon,</i></div>
<div class="verse"><i>Lifting our ... feet to the ... time of the ... tune.</i></div>
<div class="verse"><i>Come, brother, ... Come, sister, ... join in our ... line;</i></div>
<div class="verse"><i>Join with us ... now in this ... dancing divine.</i>”</div>
</div></div>
<p>So they came up toward us, while that strange magnetic
attraction grew ever stronger upon me. For some reason
which I could not fathom, I felt a profound desire to join
in the procession. A kind of hallucinatory craving came
over me, though I fought it down. At last Glendyne’s
voice broke the spell.</p>
<p>“Fine example of choreomania, isn’t it? Perfectly well-recognised
type. The old Dancing Mania of the fourteenth
century. Bound to arise under conditions like the present.”</p>
<p>The phrases fell on my ear and by their matter-of-factness
seemed to come between me and the fascination which the
lullaby and the rhythmical motion had begun to exercise
upon my mind. Almost without any feeling whatever, I
watched the Dancers approaching.</p>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="first">“<i>Here we go ... dancing ... under the ... Moon.</i></div>
<div class="verse"><i>Join in our ... chain, it will ... break all too ... soon.</i></div>
<div class="verse"><i>When this verse ... ends, then ... scatter like ... rain;</i></div>
<div class="verse"><i>And each dance a ... lone till we ... form it a ... gain.</i>”</div>
</div></div>
<p>At the last word of the verse, the procession dissolved
into a whirling crowd of figures, dancing, springing, spinning
in their aimless evolutions. We were caught up in the
mob; and only Glendyne’s grip on my arm prevented my
being jostled from his side. A knot of the Dancers came
about us and strove to excite us into their revels. Women
with tossing hair besought us breathlessly to join them;
men dragged at us, striving to bring us out among them.
All the faces wore the same look of ardency, the same
expression about the lips. Some were weary; but still the
excitement bore them up in their convulsions. The temptation
to join them became almost irresistible; and I felt
myself being drawn into their ranks when suddenly the
singing broke out once more.</p>
<p class="center">“<i>Here we go ... dancing ... under the ... Moon....</i>”</p>
<p>The procession reformed in haste, gathering length as it
went; and the Dancers began again to move eastward along
Oxford Street. I watched them go, still feeling the attraction
long after they were past; and only some minutes later I
realised that Glendyne was still gripping my arm.</p>
<p>“Perhaps you understand now the way in which those
two girls were lost,” he said. “A slight weakening of
control, eh? Not so bad for a man; but when a girl gives
in to it!... Let’s go up Rathbone Place, now. I expect
we may meet something interesting in that direction.”</p>
<p>Interesting! I had had enough of interest these last few
minutes. I was still quivering with the rhythm of that
doggerel song. However, I followed him across Oxford
Street, into Rathbone Place. Here the clothed skeletons
lay more thickly about our path. Between Oxford Street
and Black Horse Yard I counted thirty-seven. Many of
them lay in the road; but the majority were huddled in
corners and doorways, as though the poor wretches had
sought a quiet place in which to die. In the distance I
heard wild shouting and the sound of something like a tom-tom
being beaten intermittently; whilst in the silences
between these outbursts, the roar of the flames somewhere
in the neighbourhood came to me over the roofs.</p>
<p>At the corner of Gresse Street, a gaunt creature sidled
up to us furtively; looked us up and down for a moment;
and whispered to me: “Are <i>you</i> one of us?” Then,
catching sight of the Red Cross on my arm, he fled into
the darkness of the side-street without waiting for an
answer.</p>
<p>In Percy Street, the <i>petroleuses</i> were at work, methodically
drenching houses with oil and setting them alight. One
side of the street was already ablaze; and the light wind
was blowing clouds of sparks broadcast over the neighbouring
roofs. London was clearly doomed. Nothing could
save it now, even had anyone wished to do so. As we
stood at the street-corner, one of the hags passed us and
snarled as she went by:</p>
<p>“We’ll roast you out of the West End soon, you ——
burjwaw! There’ll be lights enough for you and yer women
to dance by when Molly comes with her pail. You’ve trod
us down and starved us long enough. It’s our turn now.
It’s our turn now, d’yer hear? I could burn ye as ye
stand”—she drew back her bucket as though to drench us
with petrol—“but I want ye to dance with the rest to
make it complete. We’ll fix ye before long, we will.”</p>
<p>At the southern end of Charlotte Street a rough cross
had been erected in the middle of the road and to it clung
the remains of a skeleton. Most of the bones had fallen to
the ground, but enough remained to show that a body—dead
or alive—had been crucified there at one time. Over the
head of the cross was nailed a placard with the inscription:</p>
<p class="center">ACHTUNG!<br/>
EINGANG VERBOTEN.<br/>
WIR SIND HIER ZU HAUSE<br/>
STÖREN UNS NICHT.</p>
<p>Glendyne was evidently acquainted with the placard, for
he did not come forward to read it. He turned to the left
and led me into Upper Rathbone Place.</p>
<p>“Mostly Germans in Charlotte Street now,” he said.
“A branch of the East End colony, and just about as bad
as their friends. I pity anyone who falls into their hands.
Ugh!”</p>
<p>He spat on the ground as though he had a bad taste in
his mouth.</p>
<p>“Thank goodness, this is only a small colony, for that
sort of thing is apt to contaminate everything in its neighbourhood.
Down East it’s on a bigger scale. Hark to
that!”</p>
<p>Across the house-roofs between us and Charlotte Street
there came a long quivering cry as of someone in the
extremity of physical and mental agony; then it was
drowned in a burst of laughter. Glendyne gritted his
teeth.</p>
<p>“To-morrow night, if the moonlight holds, I’ll have an
aeroplane down here and give them a taste. They’re all of
a kind, in there; so it’s easy enough to be sure we get the
right ones. Loathsome swine!”</p>
<p>We cut across into Newman Street. At the door of
St. Andrew’s Hall a weird figure was standing—a man dressed
as a faun, evidently in a costume which had been looted
from some theatrical wardrobe. When he caught sight of
us, he ran in our direction, leaping and bounding in an ungainly
fashion along the pavement and halting occasionally
to blow shrilly upon a reed pipe.</p>
<p>“Pan is not dead!” he cried. “I bring the good tidings!
All the world awakes again after its long sleep; and the
fauns in the forests are pursuing the hamadryads and
following the light feet of the oreads once more upon the
hills of Arcady. Io! Io! Evohé! Swift be the hunting!</p>
<p>“The Old Gods slumbered; but Echo, watching by
rock and pool, ever answered our calling through the years.
Awake! Awake! O Gods! Hear again the pipes of
Pan!”</p>
<p>He blew a melancholy air upon his instrument, prancing
grotesquely the while.</p>
<p>“Syrinx, reed-maiden, men have not forgotten thee!
Again they hear the wailings of thy soul in the pipes of
Pan.”</p>
<p>He danced again, looking up at the moon.</p>
<p>“Diana! Long hast thou watched us from thy throne in
the skies, but now the nights of thy hunting are come once
more. Prepare the bow, gird on thy quiver and come with
us again as in the days of old. Dost thou remember the
white goat? Join us, O Huntress!”</p>
<p>Again he made music with his pipes.</p>
<p>“Syrinx, Syrinx! I come to seek thee in the reeds by the
river. Awake! The world begins anew.”</p>
<p>And crying “Syrinx, O Syrinx!” he ran from us and
disappeared into Mortimer Street.</p>
<p>Glendyne turned into Castle Street East. I could not see
any reason for these continual turnings and windings in our
wanderings, but I suppose that he had some definite itinerary
in his mind, some route which would give him the best
opportunity of exhibiting to me the varied aspects of London
at this time. Here again the skeletons lay scattered, though
there appeared to be no aggregations of them in any particular
localities. Behind us, the Tottenham Court Road
district seemed ablaze; and flames leaped above the house-roofs
to the east.</p>
<p>Suddenly, after we had passed Berners Street, I heard a
confused sound of shouting, yells, running feet and the notes
of a horn. Glendyne started violently and dragged me
rapidly into the shelter of a house-door near the corner of
Wells Street.</p>
<p>“This is a case where the Red Cross is no protection,”
he said hurriedly. “It’s Herne and his pack. Keep as much
under cover as you can. We shall probably not be noticed,”
he added. “They seem to be in full cry. There!”</p>
<p>As he spoke, a single man rushed into view at the corner.
He was running with his head down, looking neither to
right nor left, but I caught a glimpse of his face as he passed
and I have never seen terror marked so deeply on any
countenance. He was evidently exhausted, yet he seemed
to be driven on by a frantic fear which kept him on his feet
even though he staggered and slipped as he went by.</p>
<p>“The quarry,” said Glendyne. “Now comes the pack.”</p>
<p>Almost on the heels of the fugitive, a horde of pursuers
swept into sight: about forty or fifty men and women running
with long, easy strides. Some of them shouted as they
ran, others passed in silence; but all had a dreadful air of
intentness. It was more like the final stage of a fox-hunt
than anything else that I can recall. Leading the crew was
a huge negro, running with an open razor in his hand; and
I saw flecks of foam on his mouth as he passed. Next to
him was a chestnut-haired girl wearing an evening dress
which had once been magnificent. She had kilted up the
skirt for ease in running. A silver horn was in her hand;
and on it she blew from time to time, whilst the pack yelled
in reply. The whole thing passed in a flash; and we heard
them retreating into the distance towards Oxford Street.</p>
<p>“What’s that ghastly business?” I asked Glendyne. I
had pulled out my pistol almost unconsciously when the pack
swept into sight; but he had laid a grip on my wrist and
prevented me from firing.</p>
<p>“The nigger in front was Herne—Herne the Hunter,
they call him. They hunt in a pack, you see, and run down
any isolated individual they happen to come across in their
prowlings. I wish we could get hold of them; but they
seldom come near any of the picketed areas. They can get
all the sport they need without that. Once the hunt is up,
they recognise nothing. That’s why I told you the Red
Cross wouldn’t save you. If they chase, they kill; and they
seem able to run anyone down. I never heard of a victim
escaping them.”</p>
<p>“What do they do it for?”</p>
<p>“Pleasure, fun, anything you like. It gives them a
peculiar delight to hunt and kill. You see, Flint, in these
times the instincts which are normally under control have
all broken loose upon us; and the hunting instinct is one of
the very oldest we have. In ordinary times, it comes out in
fox-hunting or grouse-shooting or some wild form like that.
But nowadays there is no restraint and the instinct can glut
itself to the full. Man-hunting is the final touch of pleasure
for these creatures.”</p>
<p>“Who was the girl at the head of them?”</p>
<p>“Oh, that? She was Lady Angela.” He gave a
sneering laugh. “What an incongruity there is in some
names! Satanita was what she ought to have been christened
if everyone had their rights. And yet, in the old days, one
could never have suspected this in her. I knew her, you
know, and I more than liked her. She used to sing me old
French songs; and one of them was rather a horrible production.
It ought to have put me on my guard; but I
suppose every man is a fool where women are concerned.”</p>
<p>He broke off and hummed to himself a snatch of an old
air:</p>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="first">“<i>Pour passer ces nuits blanches,</i></div>
<div class="indent"><i>Gallery, mes enfants,</i></div>
<div class="verse"><i>Chassait tous les dimanches</i></div>
<div class="indent"><i>Et battais les paysans.</i></div>
<div class="indent3"><i>Entendez-vous la sarabande?...</i>”</div>
</div></div>
<p>“And so now she’s running a kind of Chasse-Gallery on her
own account along with that human devil, Herne. It
shows how little one knows.”</p>
<p>Just as we approached Oxford Mansions, I heard the
sound of a pistol-shot, and when we came up to the spot
we found a still warm body with a Colt automatic clasped
in its hand. “Suicide,” said Glendyne briefly, after
examining the body. “The short way out.”</p>
<p>There was nothing to be done, so we turned away.
As we did so a black shadow dropped out of the sky and
I saw a huge crow alighting by the side of the corpse. I
think that this incident made as great an effect upon me
as any. Times had changed indeed when crows became
night-birds. Glendyne watched me drive the brute away
from the corpse without attempting to help.</p>
<p>“What’s the use? It will be back as soon as we go;
and I don’t suppose you want to stay here all night?
Birds are desperate for food nowadays, and that fellow may
give you more than you expect if you don’t leave him
alone. The old fear of man has left them, you know,
nowadays.”</p>
<p>Before we had gone many steps, we encountered another
inhabitant, a cadaverous young man with an acid stain on
his sleeve. He stopped and wished us “Good-evening,”
being apparently glad to meet someone to whom he could
talk. It was a relief to find that he appeared to be perfectly
sane. I had become so accustomed to abnormality
by this time that I think his sanity came almost as an
unexpected thing. I asked him what he did to pass the
time.</p>
<p>“I was working at some alkaloid constitutions when the
Plague came, and I just went on with that. I’ve got one
definitely settled except for the position of a single methyl
radicle, now; and I think I shall get that fixed in a day or
two. But probably you aren’t a chemist?”</p>
<p>“No. Not my line.”</p>
<p>“Rather a pity—for me, I mean. One does like to
explain what one has done; and there’s no chance of that
now.”</p>
<p>It seemed to me a pity that this enthusiast should be lost.
Probably Nordenholt could find some use for him.</p>
<p>“I think I could put you in touch with some other
chemists if you like; but you would need to trust me
in the matter. Is there anyone depending on you, any
relatives?”</p>
<p>“No, they’re all gone by now.”</p>
<p>“Well, I think I might manage it. I believe I could
put you in the way of being some use; and it might be the
saving of your life, too, for I suppose your food is almost
out.”</p>
<p>A famished look came into his face and I realised what
food meant to him.</p>
<p>“Could you? I’d be awfully grateful. I’m down to
the laboratory stores of glycerine and fatty acids now for
nourishment, and it’s pretty thin, I can tell you. Could
you really do something?”</p>
<p>In his excitement, he clutched my arm: and at that he
recoiled with a look of horror on his face.</p>
<p>“You damned cannibal!” he cried. “Did you think
you would take me in? I suppose your friend was standing
by with the sandbag, eh?”</p>
<p>He retreated a few steps and cursed me with almost
hysterical violence.</p>
<p>“If I had a pistol I would finish you,” he cried. “You
don’t deserve to live. And to think you nearly took me in.
I suppose you would have enticed me to your den with that
fairy-tale of yours.”</p>
<p>And with an indescribable sound of disgust he turned and
ran up Margaret Court, cursing as he went.</p>
<p>“What’s all that about?” I asked Glendyne. “It’s more
than Greek to me.”</p>
<p>“Of course you wouldn’t understand. I forgot that you
people up in the North don’t know there’s a famine on.
Don’t you see that when he gripped your sleeve he found
a normal arm inside instead of a starved one; and he drew
the natural conclusion.”</p>
<p>“What natural conclusion?”</p>
<p>“Really, Flint, you are a bit obtuse. You know that
food here is almost unprocurable except by those who have
rationed themselves carefully from the start and have still
some stores to go on with. How do you think the rest of
them live? Of course the poor beggar found you in normal
condition and he jumped to the conclusion that you were
a cannibal like a large number of the survivors. What else
could he think? He imagined that we were holding him
in talk until we could sandbag him or knock him out
somehow for the sake of his valuable carcase. See now?”</p>
<p>This seemed to be the last straw. Curiously enough,
I had never given a thought to the food problem. I had
simply assumed that these people in the streets were living
on hoarded stores. Cannibalism! I had never dreamed of
such a thing in London, even this London.</p>
<p>Glendyne laughed sarcastically at the expression on my
face. “Why, you are nearly as innocent as my poor clerical
friend,” he said at last. “Can’t you understand that <i>nothing</i>
counts nowadays. There isn’t any law, or order, or public
opinion or anything else that might restrain brutes. You’ve
got the final argument of civilisation in your pocket—a
brace of them, besides the loose cartridges—and that’s the
King and the Law Courts nowadays. The only thing left
is the strong hand; everything else has gone long ago. For
the most of the survivors there isn’t any morality or ethics
or public spirit. They simply want to live and enjoy themselves;
and they don’t care how they do it. Get that well
into your head, Flint.”</p>
<p>Over the next part of our exploration I may draw a veil.
We traversed the stretch from Oxford Circus to Regent
Circus, which was the centre of the remaining life of London
in those days. One cannot describe the details of saturnalia;
and I leave the matter at that. It surpassed my wildest
anticipations. At Piccadilly Circus I found a gigantic negro
acting as priest in some Voodoo mysteries. The court of
Burlington House had been turned into a temple of Khama.
I was glad indeed when we were able to make our way into
the less frequented squares to the north. Even the quiet
skeletons seemed more akin to me than these wretches whom
I saw exulting in their devilry. Glendyne had under-estimated
the thing when he said that there was no public
opinion left to control men and women. There was a new
public opinion based on the principle of “Eat, Drink, for
to-morrow we die”; and the collective spirit of these crowds
urged humanity on to excesses which no single individual
would have dared.</p>
<p>We came to the Langham by Cavendish Square and
Chandos Street. As we stood at the hotel door, I could see
the lights of the bonfires and hear the yells and shrieks of
the revellers at the Circus; but Langham Place was comparatively
quiet. Eastward, the sky was ruddy with the
flames of the burning city; southward, the bonfires shone
crimson against the pale moonlight; to the north, up
Portland Place, the streets were half in shadow and half lit
up by the brilliancy of the moon.</p>
<p>We walked northward, taking the unshadowed side of the
road. Glendyne had shown me the worst now, and only
the return to our car remained before us. I drew a breath
of relief as we turned the bend of Langham Place and the
bulk of the Langham Hotel cut us off from the sight of
these lights behind us. Here, under the moon, things
seemed purer and more peaceful.</p>
<p>We came to the corner of Duchess Street without seeing
anyone; but just as we reached the crossing, a familiar
figure stepped out. It was Lady Angela. This time I
could see her plainly in the moonlight; a tall, chestnut-haired
girl, beautiful certainly, but with the beauty of an
animal type, tigress-like. Her dress was torn and a splash of
fresh blood lay across her breast. In her hand was the silver
horn which I had noticed before. She started as she
recognised Glendyne.</p>
<p>“Well, Geoffrey,” she said; “we haven’t met for some
time. You’re looking thinner than when I saw you last.”</p>
<p>It was just as if she were greeting a friend whom she had
lost sight of for a few weeks. She did not seem to see the
incongruity of things. For all that her tone showed, they
might have met casually in a drawing-room.</p>
<p>“It’s no use, Angela, I saw you in Berners Street to-night,
you and your beasts. I knew all about you long ago.
You needn’t pretend with me.”</p>
<p>She flushed, not with shame I could guess, but with
anger.</p>
<p>“So you disapprove, do you, little man? You’re one of
the kind that can’t understand a girl enjoying herself, are
you? But if I were to whistle, you would come to heel
quick enough. You were keen enough on me in the old
days and I could make you keen again if I wished.”</p>
<p>She drew herself up and, despite her tattered dress and
disordered hair, she made a splendid figure. Her voice
became coaxing.</p>
<p>“Geoffrey, don’t you think you could take me away from
all this? It isn’t my real self that does these things; it’s
something that masters me and forces me to do them against
my will. If you would help me, I could pull up. You
used to be fond of me. Take me now.”</p>
<p>Glendyne did not hesitate.</p>
<p>“It’s no good, Angela. You’re corrupt to the core, and
you can’t conceal it. I’ve no use for you. You couldn’t
be straight if you tried. Do you think I want the associate
of a nigger? And what a nigger at that!”</p>
<p>She began to answer him, but her voice choked with fury.
She raised the silver horn to her lips; blew shrilly for a
moment and then cried: “Herne! Herne! Here’s sport
for you! Here’s sport!”</p>
<p>“I might have known that brute wouldn’t be far off if
you were here,” said Glendyne bitterly. “Flint, use your
shots in groups of three. It’s a signal to the patrol. We
may pull out yet. Here they come, the whole pack!”</p>
<p>There was a trampling of feet in Duchess Street and I
heard quite close at hand the hunting-cries of the band of
ruffians. Glendyne fired nine times into the darkness of
the street and we turned to run. Lady Angela watched us
at first without moving, brooding on her revenge. By the
time we had gone fifty yards, the whole pack was in full cry
after us up Portland Place.</p>
<p>“We may run across Sanderson’s car before they get us,”
Glendyne panted as he ran beside me. “The triple shots
may bring him. Run for all you’re worth.”</p>
<p>He had removed the empty magazine as he ran and now
turned for a moment and fired thrice in rapid succession at
our pursuers. I did the same. But there was no check in
the chase. We still maintained our distance ahead of them,
but we gained nothing. All at once I began to find that I
was falling behind. I was hopelessly out of training; and
my side ached, while my feet seemed leaden. I ran staggeringly,
just as I had seen the other quarry run in the earlier
part of the night; and I gasped for breath as I ran.</p>
<p>I shall never forget that nightmare chase. Once I turned
round and fired to gain time if possible. I heard Glendyne’s
pistol also, more than once. But nothing seemed to check
the pursuit. I felt it gaining on me; and the silver horn
sounded always nearer each time it blew. It was no distance
that we ran, but the pace was killing. I was afraid that we
might be cut off by a fresh party emerging from Cavendish
Street or Weymouth Street; but we passed these in safety.
I learned afterwards that Herne’s band hunted like hounds,
in a body, never separating into sections. Their pleasure
was in the chase as much as anything; and they employed
no strategy to trap their victims.</p>
<p>Just south of Devonshire Street I stumbled and fell.
Glendyne wheeled round at once and tried to keep off the
pack with his pistols; but as I rose to my feet again I saw
them still coming on. The moon showed up their brutal
faces hardly twenty yards away. I had given myself up for
lost, when Glendyne shouted: “Lie down!” and rolled
me over with his hand on my shoulder while he flung
himself face downwards on the road. A dazzling glare
shone in my eyes and passed; and then I saw a motor
swinging in the road and the squat shape of a Lewis gun
projected over its side.</p>
<p>I turned over and saw the pack almost upon us. Then
came the roll of the Lewis gun and the maniacs stopped as
though they had struck some invisible barrier. Herne
crashed to the ground. Lady Angela staggered, stood for a
moment fumbling with her horn, and then fell face downward.
The remainder of the band turned and fled into
Weymouth Street.</p>
<p>Glendyne picked himself up and went across to Lady
Angela’s body. She was quite dead, at which he seemed
relieved. I understood better when I saw one of the men
in the patrol car going round amongst the wounded and
finishing them with his revolver.</p>
<p>Sanderson, the patrol leader, spoke a few words to
Glendyne; and then the car swung off into Park Crescent
and disappeared. The whole thing had taken only a
few seconds; and we were left alone with the dead.</p>
<p>“It’s all right now, Flint,” said Glendyne. “They won’t
dare to come back. Besides, the leaders are gone”—he
kicked the negro’s body—“and they were the worst. I’ll
take this as a souvenir, I think.”</p>
<p>He picked up the little silver horn; and I wondered what
it would remind him of in later days.</p>
<p>It was in Park Crescent that I got my last glimpse of the
new London. On the pavement, half-way round to
Copeland Road Station, I saw something moving; and on
examining it closely I found that it was a dying man. All
about him were rats which were attacking him, while he
feebly tried to keep them at bay. He was too weak to
defend himself and already he had been badly bitten.
There was nothing to be done; but Glendyne and I stood
beside him till he died, while the rats huddled in a circle
about him, waiting their chance. Glendyne kept them
back by flashing his electric torch on them when they
became too venturesome.</p>
<p>That was my last sight of London in these days; and
looking back upon it, I cannot help feeling that this squalid
tragedy was symbolical of greater things. The old civilisation
went its way, healthy on the surface, full of life and vigour,
apparently unshakable in its power. Yet all the while, at
the back of it there lurked in odd corners the brutal instincts,
darting into view at times for a moment and then returning
into the darkness which was their home. Suddenly came
the Famine: and civilisation shook, grew weaker and lost
its power over men. With that, all the evil passions were
unleashed and free to run abroad. Bolder and bolder they
grew, till at last civilisation went down before them, feebly
attempting to ward them off and failing more and more to
protect itself. It was the dying man and the rats on a
gigantic scale.</p>
<p>I came back to the Clyde Valley a very different being.
Now I knew what had to be fought if our Fata Morgana
was to rise on solid foundations; and the task appalled me.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 class="nobreak"><small>CHAPTER XIII</small><br/>


Reconstruction</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">When</span> I saw Nordenholt again after my return, I found
that I had no need to describe my experiences. He seemed
to know exactly where I had been and what had happened to
me. I suspect that Glendyne must have furnished him with
a full report of the night’s doings.</p>
<p>“Well, Jack,” he greeted me; “what do you think of
things now?”</p>
<p>“I’m down in the depths,” I confessed frankly. “If that’s
what lies at the roots of humanity, I see no chance of
building much upon such foundations. The trail of the
brute’s over everything.”</p>
<p>“Of course it is! The whole of our machine is constructed
on a brute basis. Did you need to go to London to see that?
Why, man, every time you walk you swing your left hand
and your right foot in time with each other; and that’s only
a legacy of some four-footed ancestor which ran with the near
fore-leg and off hind-leg acting in unison. Of course the
brute is the basis. A wolf-pack will give you a microcosm
of a nation: family life, struggles between wolf and wolf for
a living, co-operation against an external enemy or prey. But
don’t forget that humanity has refined things a little. Give
it credit for that at least. People laugh at the calf-love of a
boy; but in many cases that has no sexual feeling in it; it
has touched a less brutal spring somewhere in the machine.
There’s altruism, too; it isn’t so uncommon as you think.
And patriotism isn’t necessarily confined to a mere tooth-and-claw
grapple with a hated opponent; it might still exist even
if wars were abolished. I know you’re still under the cloud,
Jack; but don’t think that the sun has gone down for good
simply because it’s hidden. All I wanted you to see was
that you must be on your guard in your reconstruction.
You and Elsa were planning for an ideal humanity. I want
you to make things bearable for the flesh-and-blood units
with which you have to work. Don’t strain them too
high.”</p>
<p>“I wish I could find my way through it all,” I said.
“But anyway I see your point. What you wanted was to
let me know which was sand and which was rock to build on,
wasn’t it? You were afraid I was mistaking it all for solid
ground?”</p>
<p>“That’s about it. Remember, with decent luck you ought
to have a clean slate to start with. Most of our old troubles
have solved themselves, or will solve themselves in the course
of the next few months. There’s no idle class in the
Nitrogen Area; money’s only a convenient fiction and now
they know it by experience; there’s no Parliament, no gabble
about Democracy, no laws that a man can’t understand.
I’ve made a clean sweep of most of the old system; and the
rest will go down before we’re done.”</p>
<p>“I know that, but to tell the truth I don’t know where to
begin building. It seems an impossible business; the more
I look at it the less confidence I have in myself.”</p>
<p>“Don’t worry so much about that. You’ll see that it
will solve itself step by step. It’s not so much cut-and-dried
plans you need as a flexible mind combined with general
principles. It’s the principles that will worry you.”</p>
<p>“I suppose you are right,” I said.</p>
<p>“It’s obvious if you look at it. Your first stages will be
the getting of these five million people into two sets: one on
the land to cultivate it; the other still working on nitrogen.
That’s evident. The whole of that part of the thing is a
matter of statistics and calculation; there’s nothing in it,
so far as thinking goes. After that, you have to arrange to
get the best out of the people mentally and morally; and
I think Elsa will be a help to you there. By the way,
she refuses to leave me.”</p>
<p>“Then how am I going to get her help?”</p>
<p>“Oh, I’ve arranged that she is to have lighter work and
she’ll have the evenings free; so you and she can consult
then, if you will.”</p>
<p>This seemed to be enough to go on with.</p>
<p>“There’s another thing, Jack,” he continued, “I’ve got
good news for you. It appears from the work that the
bacteriologists are doing that <i>B. diazotans</i> is a short-lived
creature. According to their results, the whole lot will die
out in less than three months from now, as far as this part of
the country is concerned. Apparently it combined tremendous
reproductive power with a very short existence; and
it’s now reaching the end of its tether. So in three months
we ought to be able to get the nitrogenous stuff on to the
fields without any fear of having it decomposed. That was
what always frightened me; for if <i>B. diazotans</i> had been a
permanent thing, the whole scheme would have collapsed. I
foresaw that, but we just had to take the chance; and I
always hoped that if the worst came to the worst we might
hit on some anti-agent which would destroy the brutes. You
know that in some places it hasn’t produced any effect at all;
the local conditions seem against it, somehow.”</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>Reconstruction! I remember those early days when I sat
in my office for hours together, making notes of schemes
which I tore up next day with an ever-increasing irritation at
my own sterility. Given a clean slate to start with, it seems
at first sight the easiest thing in the world to draw the plans
of a Utopia, or at any rate to rough in the outlines when one
is not hampered by details. Try it yourself! You may
have better luck or a greater imagination than I had; and
possibly you may succeed in satisfying yourself: but remember
that I had real responsibility upon me; mine was not the easy
dreaming of a literary man dealing with puppets drawn from
his ink-pot, malleable to his will; it was a flesh-and-blood
humanity with all its weaknesses, its failings, its meannesses
that I had to deal with in my schemes.</p>
<p>I cannot tell how many sketches I made and discarded in
turn. Most of them I had not even courage to put upon the
files; so that I cannot now trace the evolution of my ideas.
I can recall that, as time went on, my projects became more
and more modest in their scope; and I think that they seem
to fall into four main divisions.</p>
<p>At the start, I began by imagining an ideal humanity, something
like the dwellers in our Fata Morgana; and from
this picture I deducted bit by bit all that seemed unrealisable
with humanity as it was. I cut away a custom here, a
tradition there, until I had reduced the whole sketch to a
framework. And when I put this framework together upon
paper and saw what it contained, I found it to be an invertebrate
mass of disconnected shreds and tatters with no life in
it and no hope of existence. I remember even now the
disappointment which that discovery gave me. I began to
understand the gulf between comfortable theories and hard
facts.</p>
<p>In the next stage of my development, I leaned mainly upon
the future. I was still under the sting of my disillusion; and
I discarded the idea that existing humanity could ever enter
the courts of Fata Morgana. I tried to plan foundations upon
which the newer generations could rise to the heights.
Education! Had we ever in the old days understood the
meaning of the word? Had we ever consciously tried to
draw out all that was best in the human mind? Or had we
merely stuffed the human intellect with disconnected scraps
of knowledge, the mere bones from which all the flesh had
wasted away? We had a clean slate—how often my mind
recurred to that simile in those days—could we not write
something better upon it than had been written in the past?
A chasm separated us from the older days; we need be
hampered by no traditions. Could we not start a fresh
line?</p>
<p>I pondered this for days on end. It seemed to be feasible
in some ways; but in other directions I saw the difficulties
to the full. The clean slate was not a real thing
at all. Environment counts for so much; and all the adult
minds in the community had been bred in the atmosphere
of the past. Their influence would always be there to
hamper us, bearing down upon the younger generations and
cramping them in the old ideas. There could be no clean
severance between present and future, only a gradual change of
outlook through the years.</p>
<p>My third stage of evolution led on from this conclusion. I
accepted the present as it was and then tried to discover ways
in which improvements might be made in the future. Again
I spent days in picking out faults and making additions to the
fabric of society; and at the end of it all I found, as I had done
before, that the result was a patchwork, something which had
no organic life of its own.</p>
<p>At this point, I think, I began to despair entirely; and I
fell back upon pure materialism. I considered the matter
solely from the standpoint of the practical needs of the time;
for there I felt myself upon sure ground. Whatever
happened, I must have ready a concrete scheme which would
tide us over our early stages in the future.</p>
<p>I secured statistics showing the proportions of the population
which would be required in all the different branches of labour
during the coming year; and in doing this I had to divide
them into groups according as they were to work on the land
or were required for keeping up the supply of fixed nitrogen
from the factories. My charts showed me the areas which
we expected to have under cultivation at given dates in the
future. I was back again in the unreal world of graphs and
curves; and I think that in some ways it was an advantage
to me to eliminate the human factor. It kept me from
brooding too much over my recollections of humanity in its
decline.</p>
<p>On this materialistic basis, the whole thing resolved itself
into a problem of labour economy: the devising of a method
whereby the greatest yield of food could be obtained with the
smallest expenditure of power. Here I was on familiar
ground; for it was my factory problem over again, though the
actual conditions were different. There were only two main
sides to the question: on the one hand I had to ensure the
greatest amount of food possible and on the other I had to
look to the ease of distribution of that food when it was produced.
The idea of huge tractor-ploughed areas followed as
a matter of course; and from this developed the conception
of humanity gathered into a number of moderately-sized
aggregations rather than spread in cottages here and there
throughout the country-side. Each of these centres of
population would contain within itself all the essentials of
existence and would thus be a single unit capable of almost
independent existence.</p>
<p>Having in this way roughed out my scheme, other factors
forced themselves on my attention. I had no wish to utilise
the old villages which still remained dotted here and there about
the country-side. Their sizes and positions had been dictated
by conditions which had now passed away; and it seemed
better to make a clean sweep of them and start afresh. From
the purely practical standpoint, the erection of huge phalansteries
at fixed points would no doubt have been the simplest
solution of the problem; but I rejected this conception. I
wanted something better than barracks for my people to live
in. I wanted variety, not a depressing uniformity. And I
wanted beauty also.</p>
<p>Step by step I began to see my way clearer before me.
And now that I look back upon it, I was simply following in
the track of Nature herself. To make sure of the material
things, to preserve the race first of all; then to increase comfort,
to make some spot of the Earth’s surface different from
the rest for each of us, to create a “home”; lastly, when the
material side had been buttressed securely, to turn to the mind
and open it to beauty: that seems to me to be the normal
progress of humanity in the past, from the Stone Age
onwards.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>It was at this period that Elsa Huntingtower came more
into my life. While I was laying down the broad outlines
of the material side of the coming reconstruction, I had
preferred to work alone; for in dealing with problems of
this nature, it seems to me best to have a single mind upon
the work. It was largely a matter of dry statistics, calculations,
graphs, estimates, cartography and so forth; and since
it seemed to me to be governed almost entirely by practical
factors, I did not think that much could be gained by calling
for her help. I waited till I had the outlines of the project
completed before applying to Nordenholt in the matter.
When I spoke to him, he agreed with what I had done.</p>
<p>“I don’t want to see your plans, Jack. It’s your show;
and if I were to see them I would probably want to make
suggestions and shake your trust in your own judgment.
Much better not.”</p>
<p>“What about Miss Huntingtower’s help? Am I not to
get that?”</p>
<p>“That’s a different matter entirely. She ought to give
you the feminine point of view, which I couldn’t do. Let’s
see. She can consult with you in the evenings. Will
that do?”</p>
<p>I agreed; and it was arranged that thereafter I was to
spend the evenings at Nordenholt’s house, where she and I
could discuss things in peace. Nordenholt left us almost
entirely to ourselves, though occasionally he would come
into the room where we worked: but he refused to take
any interest in our affairs.</p>
<p>“One thing at a time for me, nowadays,” he used to say,
when she appealed to him. “My affair is to bring things
up to the point where you two can take over. Your
business is to be ready to pull the starting-lever when I
give you the word. I won’t look beyond my limits.”</p>
<p>And, indeed, he had enough to do at that time. Things
were not always smooth in the Nitrogen Area; and I could
see signs that they might even become more difficult. Since I
had left my own department, I had gained more information
about the general state of affairs; and I could comprehend
the possibilities of wreckage which menaced us as the
months went by.</p>
<p>I have said before that it is almost impossible for me to
retrace in detail the evolution of my reconstruction plans;
and in the part where Elsa Huntingtower and I collaborated,
my recollections are even more confused than they are with
regard to the work I did alone. So much of it was developed
by discussions between us that in the end it was
hard to say who was really responsible for the final form of
the schemes which we laid down in common. She brought
a totally new atmosphere into the problem, details mostly,
but details which meant the remodelling of much that I
had planned.</p>
<p>One example will be sufficient to show what I mean.
I had, as I have mentioned, planned a series of semi-isolated
communities scattered over the cultivable area; and I had
gone the length of getting my architects to design houses
which I thought would be the best possible compromise:
something that would please the average taste without
offending people who happened to be particular in details.
I showed some of these drawings to her, expecting approval.
She examined them carefully for a long time, without saying
anything.</p>
<p>“Well, Mr. Flint,” she said at last, “I know you will
think I am very hard to please; but personally I wouldn’t
live in one of these things if you paid me to do it.”</p>
<p>“What’s wrong with them? That one was drawn by
Atkinson, and I believe he’s supposed to be a rather good
architect.”</p>
<p>“Of course he is. That’s just what condemns him in
my mind. Don’t you know that for generations the ‘best
architects’ have been imposing on people, giving them
something that no one wants; and carrying it off just
because they are the ‘best architects’ and are supposed
to know what is the right thing. And not one of them
ever seems to have taken the trouble to find out what
a woman wants, in a house. Not one.</p>
<p>“Don’t you see the awful sameness in these designs, for
one thing? You men seem to think that if you get four
walls and a roof, everything is all right. Can’t you understand
that one woman wants something different from
another one?”</p>
<p>There certainly was a monotony about the designs, now
I came to look at them.</p>
<p>“Now here’s a suggestion,” she went on. “It may not
be practical, but it’s your business to make it practicable,
and not simply to accept what another man tells you is
possible or impossible. You say that your trouble is that
you want to standardise, so as to make production on a
large scale easy. So you’ve simply set out to standardise
your finished product; and you want to build so many
houses of one type and so many of another type and let
your people choose between the two types. Now my idea
is quite different. Suppose that you were to standardise
your <i>material</i> so that it is capable of adaptation? You
see what I mean?”</p>
<p>“I’m afraid I don’t,” I said.</p>
<p>“Like Meccano. You get a dozen strips of metal and
some screws and wheels; and out of that you can build
fifty different models, using the same pieces in each model.
Well, why not try to design your girders and beams and
doors and so forth, in such a way that out of the same
set you could erect a whole series of different houses. It
doesn’t seem to me an impossibility if you get someone
with brains to do it.”</p>
<p>“It sounds all right in theory; but I’m not so sure about
the practical side.”</p>
<p>“Of course if you put some old fogey on to it he won’t
be able to do it; but try a young man who believes in the
idea and you’ll get it done, I’m sure. It may mean
making each part a little more complicated than it would
normally be; but that doesn’t matter much in mass-production,
does it?”</p>
<p>“It’s not an insuperable difficulty.”</p>
<p>“Well, another thing. Get your architect to draw up
sketches of all the possible combinations he can get out
of his standardised material; and then when people want
a house, they can look at the different designs and among
them all they are almost sure to find something that suits
their taste. It is much better than your idea of three or
four standard house-patterns, anyway.”</p>
<p>“I’ll see what can be done.”</p>
<p>“Oh, the thing will be easy enough if you mean to have
it. A child can build endless castles with a single box of
bricks; and surely a man’s brain ought to be able to do
with beams and joists what a child does with bricks.”</p>
<p>I give this as an example of her suggestions. Some of
her improvements seemed trivial to me; but I took it that
it was just these trivial things that made all the difference
to a feminine mind; so I followed her more or less blindly.</p>
<p>Our collaboration was an ideal one, notwithstanding some
hard-fought debatable points. More and more, as time went
on, I began to understand the wisdom Nordenholt had
shown in demanding that I should take her into partnership.
Our minds worked on totally different lines; but for that
very reason we completed each other, one seeing what the
other missed. I found that she was open to conviction if
one could actually put a finger on any weak point in her
schemes.</p>
<p>And, behind the details of our plans, I began to see more
and more clearly the outlines of her character. I suppose that
most men, thrown into daily contact with any girl above
the average in looks and brains, will drift into some sort of
admiration which is hardly platonic; but in these affairs
propinquity usually completes what it has begun by showing
up weak points in character or little mannerisms which end
by repelling instead of attracting. In a drawing-room,
people are always on their guard to some extent; but in
the midst of absorbing work, real character comes out.
One sees gaps in intelligence; failures to follow out a line
of thought become apparent; any inharmony in character
soon makes itself felt. One seldom sees teachers marrying
their girl-students. But in Elsa Huntingtower I found a
brain as good as my own, though working along different
lines. I expect that her association with Nordenholt had
given her chances which few girls ever have; but she had
natural abilities which had been sharpened by that contact.
She puzzled me, I must admit. My mind works very much
in the concrete; I like to see every step along the road,
to test each foothold before trusting my weight upon it. To
me, her mental processes seemed to depend more upon some
intuition than did mine; but I believe now that her reasoning
was as rigid as my own and that it seemed disjointed
merely because her steps were different from mine. My
brain worked in arithmetical progression, if I may put it
so, whilst hers followed a geometrical progression. Often
it was a dead heat between the hare and the tortoise; for
my steady advance attained the goal just when her mysterious
leaps of intelligence had brought her to the same point by
a different path.</p>
<p>It was not until we had cleared the ground of the main
practical difficulties that we allowed ourselves to think of
the future. At first, everything was subordinated to the
necessity of getting something coherent planned which
would be ready for the ensuing stage after the Nitrogen
Area had done its work. But once we had convinced
ourselves that we had roughed out things on the material
side, we turned our minds in other directions as a kind
of relaxation. Of course we held divergent opinions upon
many questions.</p>
<p>“What you want, Mr. Flint, is to build a kind of
human rabbit hutch, designed on the best hygienic lines.
I can see that at the back of your mind all the time. You
think material things ought to come first, don’t you?”</p>
<p>“I certainly want to see the people well housed and
well cared for before going any further.”</p>
<p>“And then?”</p>
<p>“Oh, after that, I want other things as well, naturally.”</p>
<p>“Well, I’ll tell you what I want. I want to see them
<i>happy</i>.”</p>
<p>I can still remember that evening. The table between
us was covered with papers; and a shaded lamp threw a
soothing light upon them. All the rest of the room was in
shadow; and I saw her face against the setting of the
darkness behind her. In the next room I could feel the
slow steps of Nordenholt in his study, pacing up and down
as he revolved some problem in his mind.</p>
<p>“When I think about it,” she went on, after a pause,
“you men amaze me. In the mass, I mean, of course;
I’m not talking about individuals. There seem to be three
classes of you. The biggest class is simply looking for what
it calls ‘a good time.’ It wants to enjoy itself; it looks on
the world just as a playground; and it never seems to get
beyond the stage of a child crying for amusement in a
nursery. At the end of things, that type leaves the world
just where the world was before. It achieves nothing; and
often it merely bores itself. It doesn’t even know how to
look for happiness. I don’t see much chance for that type
in the future, now that things have changed.</p>
<p>“Then there’s a second class which is a shade better.
They want to make money; and they’re generally successful
in that, for they are single-minded. But in concentrating
on money, it seems to me, they lose everything
else. In the end, they can do nothing with their money
except turn it into more. They can’t spend it profitably;
they haven’t had the education for that. They just gather
money in, and gather it in, and become more and more
slaves to their acquisitive instincts. To a certain extent
they are better than the first type of men, for they do
incidentally achieve something in the world. You can’t
begin to make money without doing <i>something</i>. You need
to manufacture or to transport goods or develop resources
or organise in some way; so mankind as a whole profits
incidentally.</p>
<p>“Then you come to the last of the types: the men who
want to <i>do</i> something. Activity is their form of happiness.
All the inventors and discoverers and explorers belong to
that class, all the artists and engineers and builders of things,
great or small. Their happiness is in creation, bringing
something new into the world, whether it’s new knowledge
or new methods or new beauty. But they are the smallest
class of all.”</p>
<p>“What amazes you in that?”</p>
<p>“The difference in the proportions of men in the different
classes, of course. You know what the third type
get out of life: you’re one of them yourself. Wouldn’t
things be better if everyone got these things? Don’t you
think the pleasure of creation is the greatest of all?”</p>
<p>“Of course I do; but that’s because I’m built that way.
I can’t help it.”</p>
<p>“Well, I think that a good many of the rest of us have
the instinct too; but it gets stifled very early. It seems to
me that our education in the past has been all wrong. It
has never been education at all, in the proper sense of the
term. It’s been a case of putting things into minds instead
of drawing out what the mind contains already.”</p>
<p>I was struck by the similarity between her thoughts and
my own upon this matter; but after all, there was nothing
surprising in that; it was what everyone thought who had
speculated at all on the problem. She was silent for a
time; then she continued:</p>
<p>“It’s just like the thing we were speaking of to-night.
A child’s mind is like a box of bricks; and each child has
a different box with bricks unlike those of any other
child. Our educational system has been arranged to force
each child to build a standard pattern of house from its
bricks, whether the bricks were suitable or not. The whole
training has been drawn up to suit what they call ‘the
average child’—a thing that never existed. So you get
each child’s mind cramped in all sorts of directions, capacities
stifled, a rooted distaste for knowledge engendered—a
pretty result to aim at!”</p>
<p>“I don’t think you realise the difficulties of the thing,”
I said. “The younger generation isn’t a handful; it’s a
largish mass to tackle: and one must cut one’s coat according
to one’s cloth. The number of possible instructors is
limited by the labour market.”</p>
<p>“Hearken to the voice of the ‘practical man.’” She
laughed, but not unkindly. “You don’t seem to realise,
Mr. Flint, that things <i>can</i> be done if one is determined
to do them—physical impossibilities apart, of course. When
a conjurer devises a trick, do you think that he sets out by
considering his available machinery? Not at all. He first
thinks of the illusion he wants to produce; and he fits his
machinery to that. What we need to do is to fix on our
aim and then invent machinery for it. You seem to me
always to put the cart before the horse and to work on the
lines: ‘What can we do with the machinery we have?’
That’s all wrong, you know. We’re on the edge of a new
time now; and we can do as we please. The old system
is gone; and we can set up anything we choose. What
we have to be sure is that the end we work toward is the
right one.”</p>
<p>We discussed education from various points of view, I
remember; but what struck me most in her ideas was the
emphasis which she laid on the faculty of wonder. One of
her fears was that, in the stress of the new time, life would
become machine-made and that the human race might
degenerate into a mere set of engine-tenders to whom the
whole world of imagination was closed.</p>
<p>“I would begin with the tiny children,” she said, “and
feed their minds on fairy tales. Only they would be new
kinds of fairy tales—something to bring the wonder of
Fairyland into their daily life. The old fairy tales were
always about things ‘once upon a time’ and in some dim
far-off country which no child ever reached. I want to
bring Fairyland to their very doors and keep some of the
mystery in life. I wouldn’t mind if they grew superstitious
and believed in gnomes and elves and sprites and such
things, so long as they felt the world was wonderful. We
mustn’t let them become mere slaves to machinery. Life
needs a tinge of unreality if one is to get the most out of
it, so long as it is the right kind of unreality. Did you
ever read Hudson’s <i>Crystal Age</i>?”</p>
<p>“No, I never came across it.”</p>
<p>“Do you mind if I show you something in it?”</p>
<p>She rose and took down a book from its shelf; then,
coming back into the lamplight, searched for a passage and
began to read:</p>
<p>“‘Thus ... we come to the wilderness of Coradine....
There a stony soil brings forth only thorns, and thistles, and
sere tufts of grass; and blustering winds rush over the
unsheltered reaches, where the rough-haired goats huddle
for warmth; and there is no melody save the many-toned
voices of the wind and the plover’s wild cry. There dwell
the children of Coradine, on the threshold of the wind-vexed
wilderness, where the stupendous columns of green
glass uphold the roof of the House of Coradine; the ocean’s
voice is in their rooms, and the inland-blowing wind brings
to them the salt spray and yellow sand swept at low tide
from the desolate floors of the sea, and the white-winged
bird flying from the black tempest screams aloud in their
shadowy halls. There, from the high terraces, when the
moon is at its full, we see the children of Coradine gathered
together, arrayed like no others, in shining garments of
gossamer threads, when, like thistledown chased by eddying
winds, now whirling in a cloud, now scattering far apart,
they dance their moonlight dances on the wide alabaster
floors; and coming and going they pass away, and seem
to melt into the moonlight, yet ever to return again with
changeful melody and new measures. And, seeing this, all
those things in which we ourselves excel seem poor in comparison,
becoming pale in our memories. For the winds
and waves, and the whiteness and grace, have been ever
with them; and the winged seed of the thistle, and the
flight of the gull, and the storm-vexed sea, flowering in
foam, and the light of the moon on sea and barren land,
have taught them this art, and a swiftness and grace which
they alone possess.’”</p>
<p>The moonbeam-haunted vision which the words called
up seemed to touch something in my mind; a long-closed
gate of Faery swung softly ajar; and once more I seemed
to hear the faint and far-off horns of Elfland as I had
heard them when I was a child. Wearied with toil in my
ruthless world of the present, I paused, unconscious for a
moment, before this gateway of the Unreal. I felt the
call of the seas that wash the dim coasts of Ultima Thule
and of the strange birds crying to each other in the trees of
Hy-Brasil.</p>
<p>Miss Huntingtower sat silent; and when I came out of
these few seconds of reverie, I found that she had been
watching my expression keenly:</p>
<p>“You ‘wake from day-dreams to this real Night,’ apparently,
Mr. Flint. I could see you had gone a-wandering,
even if it was only for an instant or two. I’m glad; for
it shows you understand.”</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>I have given an account of some of these apparently
aimless and inconclusive discussions between us in order
to show clearly the manner in which we went to work.
At first, we oscillated between the practical side of things,
the planning of houses, the laying out of towns, the applications
of electricity and so forth, on the one hand, and
the most abstract considerations of the mental side of the
problem on the other. I remember that one evening we
began with the desirability of uniforms for the population
while at work. I was in favour of it on the grounds that
it would facilitate mass-production and would also mark the
worker’s trade and possibly thus develop a greater <i>esprit de
corps</i>. She conceded these points, but insisted that women
should be allowed to dress as they chose, once their work
was done. This brought us to the question of luxury
trades, and so led by degrees to the consideration of the
cultivation of artistic taste and finally to the problems of
Art in general under the new conditions. Looking back,
I see that our earlier advances were mainly gropings
towards something which we had not clearly conceived
ourselves. We did not know exactly what we wanted;
and we threshed out many matters more for the sake of
clarifying our ideas than with any real intention of applying
our conclusions in practice.</p>
<p>Gradually, however, things grew more definite as we
proceeded. We had certain ideas in common, general
principles which we both accepted: and as time went
on, this skeleton began to clothe itself in flesh and become
a living organism. She converted me to her idea that
happiness meant more than anything, provided it was
gained in the right way. Altruism was her ideal, I found,
because to her it appeared to be the most general mode of
reaching contentment. At the back of all her ideas, this
ideal seemed to lie. She wanted the new world to be a
happy world; and each of her suggestions and all of her
criticism took this as a basis.</p>
<p>It seems hardly necessary to enter into an account of the
final form which we gave to our plans. It was not Fata
Morgana that we built; but I think that at least we laid the
foundation-stone upon which our dream-city may yet arise.
These far-flung communities which you know to-day, these
groves and pleasure-grounds, these lakes and pleasances,
bright streets and velvet lawns, all sprang from our brain:
and the children who throng them, happier and more
intelligent than their fathers in their day, are also in part our
work, taught and trained in the ideals which inspired us.
If anything, we were too timid in our planning, for we had
no clue to what the future held in store for us. Had we
known in time, we might have ventured to launch into the
air the high towers of Fata Morgana itself to catch the
rising sun. On the material side, we could have done it;
but I believe we were wise in our timidity. Dream-cities
are not to be trodden by the human foot. The refining
of mankind will be a longer process than the building of
cities; and only a pure race could live in happiness in that
Theleme which we planned.</p>
<p>Looking backward, I think that during all these hours of
designing and peering into the future I caught something of
her spirit and she something of mine. By imperceptible
stages we came together, mind reaching out to mind. Unnoticed
by ourselves, our collaboration grew more efficient;
our divergences less and less.</p>
<p>I can still recall these long lamp-lit evenings, the rustle of
her skirts as she moved about the room, the cadences of her
voice, the eagerness and earnestness of her face under its crown
of fair hair. Often, as we moulded the future in that quiet
room with its shaded lights, we must have seemed like
children with an ever-new plaything which changed continually
beneath our hands. Meanwhile, over us and between
us stood the shadow of Nordenholt, ever grimmer as the
days went by, carrying his projects to their ruthless termination
like some great machine which pursues its appointed
course uninfluenced by human failings or human desires.
To me, at that time, he seemed to loom above us like some
labouring Titan, aloof, mysterious, inscrutable.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 class="nobreak"><small>CHAPTER XIV</small><br/>


Winter in the Outer World</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">My</span> narrative has hitherto been confined to affairs in the
British Isles; but to give a complete picture of the time
I must now deal, even though very briefly, with the effects
of <i>B. diazotans</i> in other parts of the globe. My account
will, of necessity, be incomplete: because our knowledge of
that period is at best a scanty one.</p>
<p>I have already indicated the part which the great air-ways
played in distribution of <i>B. diazotans</i> over the world; but
once it had been planted in the new centres to which the
aeroplanes carried it, other factors came into action. From
South-western Europe, the North-East Trade Winds bore
the bacilli across the Atlantic and spread them upon the seaboard
of South America, especially around the mouths of the
Amazon. The winds on the coast of North America
caught up the germs and drove them eventually to Scandinavia
and even further east. New Guinea, Borneo, Sumatra
and the other islands of the chain were devastated from the
Australian centres. Madagascar was contaminated also,
though the point of origin in this case is not definitely
known. Probably the ocean currents played their part,
as they certainly did in the destruction of Polynesian
vegetation.</p>
<p>Climate had a considerable influence upon the development
of the bacilli, once they were scattered. In the
Tropics, they multiplied with even greater rapidity than they
had done in the North Temperate Zone. On the Congo
and in the Amazonian forests they seem to have undergone
a process of reproduction almost inconceivably swift. Those
which drifted up into the frigid regions of the North and
South, however, appear to have perished almost without a
struggle: either on account of the low temperature or the
lack of nitrogenous material, they produced very little effect
in either of these districts. The sea-plants seem to have
been unaffected by them there; and one of the strangest
results of this inactivity was the complete change in habits
of various fishes, which now sought in the freezing North
the feeding and breeding-grounds which suited them best.
The herring left the North Sea and the cod quitted the
Banks in search of purer water. On the other hand, the
great masses of weed in the Sargasso Sea were almost
completely destroyed, along with the other accumulations
south-east of New Zealand and in the North Pacific.</p>
<p>It must not be assumed, however, that wherever the
colonies of <i>B. diazotans</i> alighted, devastation followed as a
matter of course. For some reason, which has never been
made clear, certain areas proved themselves immune from
attack; so that they remained like oases of cultivable land
amid the surrounding deserts. The areas thus preserved
from sterility were not of any great size; usually they
amounted only to a few hundred acres in extent, though in
isolated cases larger tracts were found unaffected here and
there.</p>
<p>With the recognition of the world-wide influence of <i>B.
diazotans</i>, the land became divided into two sections: the
food-producing districts and the consuming but non-productive
areas. Nowhere was there sufficient grain to make
safety a certainty. In America, most of the available food-stuffs
were still in or near their places of origin when the
panic began to grow.</p>
<p>In the matter of meat, things were much in the same
state. Those countries which produced great supplies of
cattle prohibited exports; and the beasts were hurriedly
slaughtered and the carcases salted to preserve them, as soon
as the failure of the grass made it impossible to conserve
live-stock.</p>
<p>Each country offered features of its own in the <i>débâcle</i>;
but I can only deal with one or two outstanding cases
here.</p>
<p>The European conditions were so similar to those which
I have already depicted in the case of Britain that I need not
describe them at all. Southern Russia fared better than her
neighbours; for after the Famine there were still some
remnants of her population left alive; and it seems probable
that the lower density of the Russian population retarded the
extinction of humanity in this region long after the worst
period had been reached in the western area.</p>
<p>In Africa and India, the course of the devastation was
marked by risings in which all Europeans seem to have
perished. Thus we have no descriptions of the later stages
of the disaster in either case.</p>
<p>In China, the inhabitants of the densely-populated rice-growing
districts of Eastern China were the first to have the
true position of affairs forced upon their notice; and, leaving
their useless fields, they began to move westwards. At first
the stirrings were merely sporadic; but gradually these
isolated movements reinforced one another until some
millions of Chinese were drifting into Western China and
setting up reactions among the populations which they
encountered on their way. From Manchuria, great masses
of them forced their way up the Amur Valley into Transbaikalia.
Others, sweeping over Pekin on the road, emerged
upon the banks of the Hoang Ho. The inhabitants of the
Honan Province moved westward, increasing in numbers as
they recruited from the local populations <i>en route</i>. A
massacre of foreigners took place all over China.</p>
<p>In its general character, this huge wandering of the
Mongol races recalls the movements which led eventually
to the downfall of the Roman Empire; but the parallel is
illusory. In the days of Gengis Khan, the Eastern hordes
could always find food to support them on their line of
march, either in the form of local supplies which they
captured, or in the herds which they drove with them as
they advanced. But in this new tumultuous outbreak, food
was unprocurable; and the irruption melted away almost
before the confines of China had been reached. Some
immense bands descended from Yunnan into Burmah; but
they appear to have perished among the rotting vegetation.
Another series of smaller bodies penetrated into Thibet,
where they died among the snows. The furthest stirrings
of the wave appear to have been felt in Chinese Turkestan;
and apparently Kashgar and Yarkand were centres from
which other waves might have spread: but it seems probable
that these westernmost movements were checked by the
tangle of the Pamirs and Karakorams. Nothing appears to
have reached Samarkand. But here, again, it is difficult to
discover what actually did occur. Any survivors who have
been interrogated are of the illiterate class, who had no
definite conception of the route which they followed in their
wanderings.</p>
<p>The history of Japan under the influence of <i>B. diazotans</i>
is of especial interest, since it presents the closest parallel to
our own experiences. At the outbreak of the Famine, the
practical minds of the Japanese statesmen seem to have
acted with the promptitude which Nordenholt had shown.
They had not his psychological insight, it is true; but they
had a simpler problem before them, since they could ignore
public opinion entirely. Fairly complete accounts of their
operations are in existence, so far as the outer manifestations
of their policy are concerned, though we know little as yet
of the inner history of the events.</p>
<p>Kiyotome Zada appears to have been the Japanese
Nordenholt. Under his direction, two great expeditions
raided Manchuria and Eastern China with the object of
capturing the largest possible quantity of food-stuffs. It is
probable that these two invasions, with the consequent loss
of food-supplies, led to the great stirrings among the
population of China. A Nitrogen Area was set up in the
South Island, the Kobe shipyards being its nucleus. Thereafter
the history follows very closely upon that of the Clyde
Valley experiment, except in its last stages.</p>
<p>Among the other Pacific communities the Famine proved
almost completely destructive. I have already told of the
spreading of <i>B. diazotans</i> through the chain of islands
between Australia and Burmah. In Australia itself no
attempt was made to found a nitrogen-producing plant
on a sufficiently large scale.</p>
<p>One curious episode deserves mention. In the earlier
days of the Famine, news reached the Australian ports that
certain of the Polynesian islands were still free from the
scourge; and a frenzied emigration followed. But each
ship carried with it the freight of <i>B. diazotans</i>, so that this
exodus merely served to spread the bacilli into spots which
otherwise they might not have reached. Before very long
the whole of Polynesia was involved in the disaster. Some
diaries have been discovered on board deserted vessels; and
in every case the history is the same: the long search
through devastated islands, the discovery at last of some
untouched spot in the ocean wilderness, the rejoicings, the
landing, and then, a few days later, the realisation that here
also the bacillus had made its appearance. What seems
most curious is the fact that in many cases it was weeks
before the ship’s company grasped the apparently obvious
truth that their own appearance coincided with the arrival
of the fatal germs. It never seems to have occurred to any
of them that they bore with them the very thing which
they were trying to escape. So they went from island to
island, seeking refuge from a plague which stood ever at
their elbow, until at last their stores failed.</p>
<p>On the West Coast of South America a new phenomenon
appeared. The huge deposits of nitrates in Bolivia and
South Peru formed the best breeding-ground for <i>B. diazotans</i>
which had yet been detected, with the result that nitrogen
poured into the atmosphere in unheard-of volumes. In
most places the winds were sufficient to disperse these
invisible clouds of gas; but in some spots the arrival of the
bacilli coincided with a dead calm, so that the nitrogen
remained in the neighbourhood in which it was generated.
The great salt swamp in the Potosi district furnished the
best example of this phenomenon. The whole surface
frothed and boiled for days together; and the atmosphere in
the neighbourhood became so heavily charged with nitrous
fumes that the air was almost unbreatheable. All the inhabitants
of the district fled before this, to them, inexplicable
danger; and the effects extended as far as Llica and the
railway junction at Uyuni. In this “caliche” district, the
destruction of combined nitrogen probably attained its
maximum; and the propagation of <i>B. diazotans</i> never
reached such a level in any other part of the world.</p>
<p>But with this enormous multiplication of the bacilli, other
events followed. Carried north and east by winds, these
huge quantities of the germs found their way into the headwaters
of the Amazon and its tributaries, and were thus carried
eastward into the very heart of the tropical forests, where they
continued to breed with almost inconceivable rapidity. Soon
the whole of the vegetation in this region was in a decline;
and the Amazon valley degenerated into a swamp choked
with dead and dying plants. Humanity was driven out long
before the end came. Animal life could not persist in the
midst of this noisome wilderness.</p>
<p>The same phenomena appeared, though in a different
form, over the southern part of South America. Here also
the great rivers formed the main distributing agencies for the
bacilli; and the whole cattle-raising district was devastated.
The stock was slaughtered on a huge scale as soon as it
became clear that vegetation had perished; but owing to
mismanagement and transport difficulties the preservatives
necessary to make the best of the meat thus obtained were
not procurable in sufficient quantities. Nevertheless, by
converting as much as possible into biltong, more than
sufficient was preserved to keep a very large part of the
population alive during the Famine; and in later days, by
trading their surplus dried meat for cereals and nitrogenous
compounds, they succeeded in rescuing a greater proportion
of lives than might have been anticipated.</p>
<p>To complete this survey of the world at that period, the
effect of <i>B. diazotans</i> upon North America still remains to
be told. I have already given some information with
regard to the spread of the Blight across the Middle West;
but I must mention that it was in this part of the world
especially that these curious isolated immune areas were
observed, wherein the bacillus seemed to make no headway.
Thousands of acres in all were found to be untouched by
the denitrifying organisms.</p>
<p>At the time of the Famine the civilisation of North
America was in a curious condition, mainly owing to the
influx of a foreign element which had taken place to a
greater and greater extent after the War. The immigrants
had come in such numbers that assimilation of them was
impossible, and in this way the stability of the central
Government was weakened. To a great extent the Southern
States had fallen into the hands of the negroes, but similar
segregations were to be found in other parts of the country.
Germans accumulated in one State, Italians in another, East
Europeans and Slavs in yet other areas. Thus Congress
became subject to the group system of government, with all
the weaknesses which such a system brings in its train.</p>
<p>When <i>B. diazotans</i> first made its appearance in the
Continent the Government in power was composed of
feeble men, without character and unfitted for bold decisions.
The prohibition of cereal exports was a measure
arising from panic rather than foresight; and once this had
been put in operation, the Government rested on its oars
and awaited the turn of events.</p>
<p>Thus at this period the United States presented the
spectacle of a series of unsympathetic communities united
by the slender bonds of a weak central Government, and
divided amongst themselves by the very deepest cleavages.
The grain-growing districts regarded the cities as parasites
upon the food-supply which had been raised; while the city
population, having only secured a certain amount of the
available food-stuffs, looked upon the Middle Westerners as
an anti-social group of hoarders. But even within these two
large groups, minor cleavages had come to light. The
poorer classes, appalled at the rise in prices, had begun to
cry out against the rich. Hasty and ill-considered legislation
was passed which, instead of curing the troubles, merely
served to augment them; and soon the whole country was
seething with undercurrents of hatred for government of
any kind.</p>
<p>With so much inflammable material, an outbreak was only
a question of time; and soon something almost akin to anarchy
prevailed. Food at any price became the cry. Those who
controlled great stores of grain had to defend them; those
who lacked sustenance had no reason to wait in patience.
Civil war of the most bitter type broke out almost simultaneously
throughout the country.</p>
<p>Hostilities took a form which had never been imagined in
any previous fighting. In the old days one of the main
objectives in the siege of an area was the shutting out of
supplies from the besieged garrison. In this American war,
however, the exact opposite held good. A starving population
encircled the areas in which food was stored and
endeavoured to force its way in; while the defenders were
well supplied with rations. Nor was this all. It was well
recognised among the besiegers that the supplies within the
besieged area were insufficient to meet the demands which
would be made upon them if the attacking force as a whole
broke through the line of the defence; and therefore each
individual attacker felt that his comrades were also his
competitors, whom he had no great desire to see survive.
Again, in the previous history of warfare, any loss on the
part of the garrison was irreparable, since no reinforcements
could penetrate the encircling lines of enemies; but in this
new form of combat any member of the attacking force was
willing to secede to the garrison if they would allow him to
do so, since by this means he could secure food. Thus the
casualties of the garrison could be made good simply by
admitting besiegers to take the place of those who had been
killed.</p>
<p>In the main, these sieges took place at points where the
harvested grain, such as it was, had been accumulated for
transport; but even the areas which had proved immune
from the attacks of <i>B. diazotans</i> were attacked by far-sighted
men who looked beyond the immediate future and who
wished to control these remaining fertile areas in view of next
year’s supplies.</p>
<p>I have before me the diary of a combatant in one of these
operations; and it appears to me that I can best give an idea
of the prevailing conditions by summarising his narrative.</p>
<p>At the time of the outbreak he resided in Omaha; and the
earlier pages of his journal are occupied by a description of
some rioting which occurred in that city, ending with its
destruction by fire. During the upheaval he became possessed,
in some way which he does not describe, of a rifle, a considerable
amount of ammunition, a certain store of food. Thus
equipped, and accompanied by four friends similarly provided,
young Hinkinson was able to get away in a Ford car from
Omaha in advance of the main body of citizens who were now
left houseless. Rumours of food-supplies led them towards
Cedar Falls; but at Ackley they discovered the error of their
information and were for a time at fault. Turning southward,
they followed various indications and finally located a fertile
area in the triangle Mexico-Moberly-Hannibal. At Palmyra,
their motor broke down permanently; and they were forced
to abandon it. Collecting as much of their equipment as they
could carry, they tramped along the railway line and eventually
reached Monroe City, which was very close to the outer edge
of the contest raging around the fertile area.</p>
<p>From indications in the diary, it seems clear that Hinkinson
and his companions expected to find at Monroe City some
sort of headquarters of the attacking forces; but as they were
unable to discover anything of the kind, they continued their
march, being joined by a small band of other armed men who
had arrived at Monroe City about the same time as themselves.</p>
<p>Almost before they were aware of it, they blundered into
the firing-line. Apparently they had already been much
surprised to find no signs of a controlling spirit in charge of
the operations; but their actual coming under fire seems to
have astounded them. They had expected to find a vast
system of trench-warfare in existence; and had been keenly
on the look-out for signs of digging which would indicate to
them that they had reached the rear positions of the attacking
force. What they actually found, as bullets began to whistle
around them, was a thin line of civilians with rifles and
bandoliers who were lying flat on the grass and firing, apparently
aimlessly into the distance. At times, some of the riflemen
would get up, run a few yards and then lie down again;
but there seemed to be no discipline or ordered activity traceable
in their methods. It appeared to be a purely individualistic
form of warfare.</p>
<p>Hinkinson added himself to the skirmishing line, more
from a desire for personal safety than with any understanding of
what was happening. It appears that he lay there most of
the afternoon, firing occasionally into the distance from which
the bullets came. His four friends were also engaged in his
immediate vicinity.</p>
<p>Later in the day his neighbour in the skirmishing line
spoke to him and suggested that he might form a sixth in the
party. Hinkinson learned from this man that during the
night the attackers generally fought among themselves for
any food which there might be; and he proposed that the
Hinkinson party should stand watch about during the darkness,
so as to avoid robbery. They agreed to this; as it
seemed the best policy: though Hinkinson himself, in the
entry he made at the end of the day, seems to throw doubt
upon the likelihood of such proceedings.</p>
<p>Fortunately, they did not entirely trust their new comrade;
and one of the five kept awake while pretending to sleep.
When the night grew dark they heard movements in the
skirmishing line, rifles were still blazing intermittently up and
down the front, and here and there they caught the groans of
the wounded. But in addition to these sounds, to which they
had by this time grown accustomed, they heard scuffles, cries
of anger, hard breathing and all the noises of men wrestling
with each other. It was a cloudy, moonless night and
nothing could be seen. At last, long before dawn, they
discovered their friend of the afternoon engaged in rifling one
of their food-bags. Finding himself discovered, he fled into
the darkness and they never saw him again.</p>
<p>It was not until well on in the next day that Hinkinson
made any further discoveries; but fresh surprises were awaiting
him. He learned that the firing-line to which he was opposed
was not a portion of the defence of the area at all, but was
part of the attacking group. This puzzled him for a day or
two, to judge from the remarks which he made in his journal;
but at length he seems to have understood that his fellow-attackers
were almost as much to be feared as the actual
defenders.</p>
<p>He gives a sketch on one page of his diary showing the
situation as he understood it. In the centre lies the actual
fertile area, surrounded by an elaborate system of entrenchments.
This zone he terms the Defence Zone. About a
mile outside this, but coming much closer in parts, lies what
he describes as the Offensive-Defensive Circle. When he
reached this section, as we learn from a later part of his
journal, he found it very roughly entrenched, the main works
being rifle-pits rather than connected trench-lines. This
Offensive-Defensive Circle was occupied by part of the
attacking force; but the actual fighting in it was upon both
front and rear. The holders of this Circle wished to force
their way into the Defence Zone; but having gained a start
upon the late comers whose firing-line lay still further to the
rear, they proposed to retard as far as possible any advance in
force from the outermost lines. Thus the combatants of the
Circle, as soon as they had forced their way into it, devoted
their attention to sniping new-comers who might follow them
up; then seizing any opportunity, they made their way forward
toward the centre and joined the inner skirmishing line
which directed its fire upon the entrenchments of the actual
Defence Zone. The outermost region, in which Hinkinson
and his friends found themselves, was composed of men who
had either arrived late on the field or failed to struggle
forward in face of the sniping from the Circle.</p>
<p>In both the outer ring and the Circle the dominating idea
was food. There was no commissariat and no central directing
body of any kind. When a man joined the outer ring,
he knew that he had only the supplies which he carried
with him; beyond that, he could count upon nothing
except what he could steal from his neighbours. The only
chance of life was to fight a way up to the centre as soon
as possible and take the chance of being recruited by the
garrison.</p>
<p>While the Hinkinson group remained intact, they were
able to protect themselves from food-thieves; but on the
fourth day in the skirmishing line one of the five was severely
wounded; and, knowing how little care was given to
wounded men, he shot himself. Two more were killed
by snipers on the fifth day. Three days later, Hinkinson
managed to establish himself in a rifle-pit of the Circle; and
he thus lost sight of his remaining friend.</p>
<p>Life in the Circle was lived under appalling conditions,
for it was within range of both the Defence Zone and the
outer skirmishing line; and there was very little chance of
exercise even at night. Food was scarcer here than in the
outer ring; and consequently raids for food were almost
incessant during the hours of darkness. Ammunition was
also very scarce; and Hinkinson was only able to keep up
his supply by searching the bodies which lay in his neighbourhood.
After two days in the rifle-pit he seems to have
suffered from some form of influenza. The only thing
which he notes with satisfaction is the fact that there was
no artillery in the whole action. It was a case of rifle-fire
from beginning to end.</p>
<p>After his third day in the rifle-pit, he succeeded in making
his way into the inner firing-line of the Circle, so that at
last he was actually in contact with the Defence Zone.
He was astonished to find that the defenders were using up
ammunition much faster than the attacking forces; and it
is clear that this puzzled him, as he could see no reason for
it. He had expected to find them running short.</p>
<p>His entry into the Defence Zone was due, apparently, to
a stroke of good luck. On the day which brought him
face to face with the defenders, he saw an attack made
from the Circle upon the entrenchments before him. It
was an utterly haphazard affair: first one man ran forward,
then two or three others joined him; and finally the force
of suggestion brought the major part of the attackers to
their feet and hurled them upon the trenches before them,
which at this point were only a few hundred yards away.
Despite its random character, it seems to have been successful
to some extent. A considerable number went down before
a bombing attack made from the trenches; but despite this
a fairly large band surmounted the parapet and disappeared
beyond. A confused sound of rifle-firing was followed by
a short silence; and then a regular volley seemed to have
been fired. None of the attacking party reappeared.</p>
<p>According to Hinkinson’s reading of the situation, a
number of the defenders had been killed in the hand-to-hand
struggle in the trenches; and he concluded that this
was his best opportunity to endeavour to gain a footing
among the defence force, which would now be weakened
slightly and possibly anxious for recruits.</p>
<p>At this point, his diary is illegible and I can throw no
light upon the subjects included in the hiatus. When it
becomes readable again, I find him a member of the defending
group.</p>
<p>Apparently on this side of the debatable land discipline
was as marked as it was absent from the other side. The
death penalty was inflicted for the slightest error. Once
or twice Hinkinson seems to have run considerable risks in
this direction through no great fault of his own.</p>
<p>He found that the defence problem was in some ways a
complex one, whilst in other directions it was simplified
considerably by the unique conditions of the new warfare.
Owing to the enormous perimeter which had to be defended,
the garrison was almost wholly used up in forming a very
thin firing-line which was liable to be rushed at any point
by strong bodies of the attacking force, as, indeed, he had
already seen himself. Given sufficient spontaneous co-operation
for a raid, the trenches could be entered without
any real difficulty by the survivors of a charge. But once
within the defended lines, the attackers were accepted as
part of the defence force, provided that their numbers were
not in excess of the casualties produced by their onset.
Thus the <i>personnel</i> of the trench-lines changed from day to
day, dead defenders being replaced by successful raiders
whose main interest had changed sides. Under such conditions,
the maintenance of discipline was a matter which
required the sternest measures. The garrison was always up
to full strength; but its members were not a military body
in the usual sense, since they changed from time to time as
new recruits took the places of the killed. Of <i>esprit de corps</i>
in the usual meaning of the words there was not a trace;
but its place was taken by the instinct of self-preservation,
which seems to have made not a bad substitute.</p>
<p>As to the question of ammunition-supply, which had
puzzled Hinkinson so much during his experiences in the
outer zones, it became simple when once he was inside the
trench-lines. There appears to have been a regular traffic
by aeroplane between the food-area and the outer world,
munitions being imported by air in exchange for food which
the air-craft took back on their return trips.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>Readers can now picture for themselves the state of the
world after the Famine had done its worst. The great
cities which marked the culmination of civilisation had all
shared the fate of London; and most of the towns had
gone the same road. All the vast and complex machinery
which mankind had so laboriously gathered together in these
teeming areas had been destroyed by fire.</p>
<p>Here and there—in Scotland, in Japan, and in a couple
of American centres—Nitrogen Areas were in full activity;
and the traditions of pre-Famine times were being kept
alive, though with profound modifications; but outside the
boundaries of these regions the only human beings left in
the world were a mere handful, scattered up and down the
globe and existing hazardously upon chance discoveries of
food-stuffs here and there. The Esquimaux had a better
prospect of survival than most of these relics of civilisation.</p>
<p>But the trifling changes involved in the downfall of
humanity were overshadowed by the effects of <i>B. diazotans</i>
upon the face of the earth. All that had once been arable
land became a desert strewn with the bones of men. The
vast virgin forests of America, Northern Europe and tropical
Africa became mere heaps of rotting vegetation: pestilential
swamps into which no man could penetrate and survive.
Apart from these regions, the land-surface was sandy, except
where boulder-clay deposits kept it together. Water ebbed
away in these thirsty deserts; and with its disappearance
the climate changed over vast areas of the world.</p>
<p>Those who went out in the early aeroplane exploring
expeditions across these stricken and barren lands came to
understand, as they had never done before, the meaning of
the abomination of desolation.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 class="nobreak"><small>CHAPTER XV</small><br/>


Document B. 53. X. 15</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">I think</span> I have made it clear that when I took over the
Reconstruction at Nordenholt’s request I did so in a disinterested
spirit, by which I mean that no personal aims of
my own were concerned. I began the work solely in the
hope that my plans would ensure the welfare of some
millions of people, hardly any of whom I knew as individuals.
It is true that I put my whole heart into the task and that
I strove with all my might to bring its conclusion within
the scope of possibility. I could do no less, in view of the
immense responsibility which I had undertaken. Possibly
my narrative has minimised the labour which the effort
involved; if so, I cannot help it.</p>
<p>Even my early stages of collaboration with Elsa Huntingtower
failed to alter this attitude of my mind. I still saw
the problem as one in which great masses of people were
involved; and although I appreciated the fact that these
masses were composed of individuals each with his or her
separate destiny to work out for good or ill, yet it never
occurred to me to regard myself as one of them.</p>
<p>I think that the vision of Fata Morgana, growing ever
clearer in my mental vision, forced my thoughts into a fresh
channel. In my mind’s eye I saw that happy city, thronged
with its joyous people; and gradually I began to picture
myself treading those lawns and wandering amid its gardens.
Alone? No, I wanted some kindred spirit, someone who
could share the victory with me; and Elsa Huntingtower
was the only one who had part and lot in it. She and I
had built its dreaming spires together by our common
labour; and it was with her that I would stray in fancy
through its courts. Of all humanity, we two alone had
rightful seizin in its soil.</p>
<p>It was late before I recognised where all this was leading
me; but when at last I awakened, it drove me with ten-fold
force. I wanted no dim future through which I might
rove as a shadow among shadows; they had served their
turn in the scheme of things and brought me face to face
with reality. If Paradise lay before me, Eve must be there,
else it would be a mockery: if I had to face failure, I needed
a comforter. I wanted Elsa.</p>
<p>I mistrust all novelists’ descriptions of the psychology of
a man in love. To me, that passion seems an integration
of selfishness and selflessness each developed to its highest
pitch and so intimately mingled that one cannot tell where
the dividing line between them lies. Luckily, analysis of
this kind is beyond the scope of my narrative. The affairs
of Elsa Huntingtower and me, so far as they concerned
ourselves alone, have no place upon my canvas; but since
in their reactions they impinged upon a greater engine, I
cannot pass them over in silence without omitting a factor
which must have had its influence upon events.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>I suppose, from what I see around me, that the average
man falls in love by degrees. He seems to be subjected to
two forces which alternately act upon him in opposite
directions, so that his advance to his goal is intermittent
and sometimes slow. In my case, there was nothing of
this wavering. Somehow, as soon as I realised what my
feelings were, I could not delay an hour longer than was
necessary. The real fact was, I suspect, that I did not
suddenly fall in love, though I seemed, even to myself, to
have done so. In all probability I had been falling in love
for weeks without knowing it; and when the illumination
came, the long sub-conscious travail had prepared me for
instant action.</p>
<p>As it happened, it was one of the days on which we
usually motored into the country. At two o’clock I was
in the Square with the car; and almost at once the door
opened and Elsa appeared. My dreams had far outrun
reality; and as the slim fur-clad figure came down the steps
I felt my pulse leap. It lasted only for a moment, but I
think she read my face like an open book. Behind her
came Nordenholt, looking very tired. I could not help
seeing the change which the last months had made in him.
The deep lines on his face were deeper still; his eyes seemed
to be different in some way, though as piercing as ever; and
his step had lost the lightness it had when I saw him first in
London. He looked me over, as he usually did, but said
nothing as he stepped into the back of the car. Elsa took
her customary place beside me; and it gave me a novel
thrill as I arranged the rug about her. It seemed as though
something had fallen from my eyes so that I saw her in
a new and wonderful aspect.</p>
<p>As we drove westward and over the Canal, I noticed that
she seemed disinclined to talk; and as I myself was busy
with my dreams, I did not try to force the conversation.
We had passed Bearsden and were in the open country
before she had spoken three sentences; and even these were
wilfully commonplace. Reflecting on this, and being myself
surcharged with emotion, I was vain enough to guess that
she was thinking of me and of what I had to tell her; for I
had a curious feeling that she must know what was in my
mind. So the milestones swept by, and still the three of us
remained silent.</p>
<p>It was a dreary landscape through which we drove; but
all landscapes in those days were bleak and sinister. In the
little wood beyond Bearsden, the trees were uprooted and
slanting here and there, owing to the new soil giving them
no support. Some, which had threatened to fall across the
road, had been cut down. Further on, the Kilpatrick Hills
loomed over us, dark from the lack of vegetation; while
across the Blane valley, once so green, the smooth folds of
the Campsies lay black under the wintry sky. Only here
and there, where snow covered the ground, did things remind
one of the old days.</p>
<p>Past the Half Way House, along Stockiemuir with its
blasted heather under its snow, up the hill at the foot of
Finnick Glen the great car ran; and yet none of us spoke a
word. Once, after that, Nordenholt gave me a direction;
and we turned off toward Loch Lomond.</p>
<p>When we reached the lochside, beyond Balloch, he made
me stop the car.</p>
<p>“I’m going to get out here and walk up towards Luss,”
he said. “You take the car on to the head of the loch and
pick me up on the way back. Don’t hurry. I want some
exercise.”</p>
<p>The door slammed; and we moved off. I looked back
and saw him standing by the water-side; and it struck me
that his attitude was that of an old man. He stood with his
hands in the pockets of his motor-coat; and his position
seemed to exaggerate the stoop of his shoulders. He looked
so very, very tired. I realised, all at once, that he was ageing
long before his time, worn out by his colossal task. An
emotion which was as much dismay as pity swept over me
in an instant. Then, as I watched, he pulled himself up
and stood erect again, gazing over the water to the desolate
islets. The car swung round a corner; and when I looked
back once more, he was out of sight.</p>
<p>But that picture haunted me as I drove up the loch. I
guessed at last what this struggle was costing him. Somehow
I had never realised it before. I had come to regard
Nordenholt as almost akin to the natural forces, the embodiment
of some great store of energy which worked upon
human destiny calmly and ever certainly. I had looked up
to his strength and leaned upon it unconsciously, knowing
only that it was there. And now, in that brief vision, I had
seen that my support was itself weakening, even though for
an instant. There had been a recovery, the old dominating
attitude reappeared as he pulled himself together again. But
before this I had never seen effort in that attitude; and I
saw it now. Even in my exalted condition, the sight of
that weary figure struck down into my memory.</p>
<p>Elsa had not looked back. She sat beside me, her clean-cut
profile emerging from her dark furs, gazing straight
before her at the road ahead. We ran through Luss without
a word to each other. My heart was throbbing with
excitement; and yet I hesitated to break the silence. Some
miles further up the road, before we reached Tarbet, she
asked me to stop the car and suggested that we should go
down to the water’s edge.</p>
<p>It was there that I at last found speech and, having found
it, poured out what I had to say in a torrent of words none
of which I can remember now. I had rehearsed that scene
many a time in my mind, and yet it all came unexpectedly.
I had never anticipated this opportunity. I had thought that
some time, when we talked of the future we were planning,
I would tell her what I needed to make it complete. And
I had thought of how she would take my pleading: I had
forecast how she would look and what she would reply.
But in none of my visions had I foreseen the reality.</p>
<p>She listened to me coldly, almost as if her mind were
occupied with other things. I grew more passionate, I
think, striving to make her understand my emotion; and
yet she seemed almost indifferent to what I said. At last I
stopped, chilled by this aloofness which I did not understand.
In my wildest imaginings I had never thought of this <i>dénouement</i>
of the situation. I think I must have grown cold
myself: for though I can recall nothing of my previous
words, the rest of the scene is graven on my mind. For
some moments after I had ceased, she remained silent; then
at length she spoke, with an accent in her voice which I had
never heard before. I remember that she had taken off one
glove and stood twisting it in her hands while she talked.</p>
<p>“I got you to stop the car here because I have something
to ask you, something of tremendous importance to me.
Forgive me if I put it first and don’t answer you immediately.
I’m ... I’m very grateful for all you have said. But this
thing comes before everything; and you must let me ask
you about it before we come to ... to our own affairs.”</p>
<p>A pang of apprehension shot through me. What could
she be driving at which was of greater importance than our
future?</p>
<p>“As I was going over my papers to-day,” she went on,
“I came across one which seemed to have been missorted.
It didn’t belong to my section. I glanced at it casually;
and then I read it. Have you any idea what it referred to?”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“It said things I could hardly grasp. Even now I think it
must be a mistake. I can’t believe it was a real document.
It must have been a hoax or something like that. And yet,
it had the usual serial numbers on it: B. 53. X. 15.”</p>
<p>My throat was dry, but I managed to pull myself together
and make a sound like “Well?” She came close to me
and looked me straight in the eyes—so like Nordenholt’s
gaze in some ways—and I tried to bring my features into a
mask.</p>
<p>“Is it true that everyone outside the Area has been left
to die? Is it true that there has been a deliberate plot to
starve all the men, all the women, even the little children in
the country? Tell me that, and tell me at once. Don’t
wait to wrap it up in fine phrases. Tell me the truth
<i>now</i>.”</p>
<p>I stood before her, silent.</p>
<p>“So it <i>is</i> true; and you knew it! You acquiesced in it.
You even helped in it; I can see it in your face. You
cur!”</p>
<p>Still I could not find my voice. This was a different
scene from that I had thought of only ten short minutes
before. It was not that I felt anything myself, except a
sort of dull comprehension that my dreams were shattered;
but the sight of the pain in her face moved me more than I
could express in words. I wanted to help her. I wanted
to justify the plan Nordenholt had made. And yet something
kept me tongue-tied. I could find no phrase to open
my explanations. The outpouring of speech which I had
found so easy only a few seconds earlier now seemed dried
up. I merely watched her, saying nothing. For a time she
struggled with herself, trying to master her feelings. All
this time her face had been set; not a tear had come to her
eyelashes.</p>
<p>“I have a right to know who planned this,” she continued,
after a pause. “Do you know what I thought at first? I
suspected Uncle Stanley. I even suspected <i>him</i>. But I
don’t, now. I know him too well. I didn’t even question
him about it. I didn’t want to worry him until I had found
out whether it was true or not. But it <i>is</i> true. Who
planned it? Answer me!”</p>
<p>There was no concealment possible. Once she had the clue,
she would discover everything almost immediately. Not
even delay was to be gained by a lie. And with her clear
eyes upon me, I could not have lied even had I wished to do
so. She might never be mine; but I was hers to do as she
wished. For a moment I hesitated, turning over in my mind
the idea of referring her to Nordenholt himself; but I
abandoned that almost instantaneously. The shock would
be greater if it came from him; better let me bear the brunt.</p>
<p>“Your uncle planned it. I helped him.”</p>
<p>“Uncle Stanley! You don’t expect me to believe that?
It shows how little you know of us both if you think....”</p>
<p>Her voice became tinged with doubt, and tears, too, came
into it. The evidence was too clear. Only Nordenholt
could have carried out such a gigantic scheme. And possibly
she read the truth in my face as well. For a moment she
seemed frozen, a rigid and silent statue. All the flush had
left her cheeks and above the softness of her furs her features
seemed as though carved in marble. When she spoke again,
she seemed to be trying to convince herself.</p>
<p>“Did Uncle Stanley suggest it? I can’t believe it. It’s
impossible. He couldn’t do a thing like that. You don’t
know him. He couldn’t. He couldn’t. I know he
couldn’t.”</p>
<p>Even in that moment of tension, I could not help reflecting
how little a woman can know of a man’s mind. Half
our mental processes are shut off from them, as probably half
of theirs are closed books to us. The great barrier of sex
divides us; and our outlook upon the world can never be
the same. This girl had been in close communion with
Nordenholt through most of her life; and yet she failed to
recognise at once as his handiwork the greatest achievement
to which he had put his powers.</p>
<p>She wavered on her feet. I stepped forward to catch her
but she struck aside my hand. Then she seated herself on
a bank. I looked away; and when I saw her again she was
sitting, her face buried in her hands, while her fragile figure
shook with suppressed sobbing.</p>
<p>“Elsa,” I said, “you don’t understand. It’s come upon
you suddenly; and you’ve been swept off your feet by it.
But it was all for the best. It had to be done.”</p>
<p>She looked up. On her face, still wet with tears, I saw
only contempt and bitterness.</p>
<p>“It had to be done?” she echoed. “Do you mean that
forty millions of people <i>had</i> to be robbed of their food and
left to starve? Can’t you see what it means, or are you
made of stone? Think of men seeing their mothers dying;
think of lovers watching their sweethearts starve; and the
children in their mothers’ arms. And you, <i>you</i> say calmly
that ‘It had to be done.’ You aren’t a machine. You had
the right to choose. And you chose <i>that</i>!”</p>
<p>“You don’t understand,” I repeated wearily. Somehow
the strain of the situation seemed to have robbed me of my
forces.</p>
<p>“No, I don’t understand. How can I, when it means
that the men I thought most of in the world turn out to be
nothing but murderers on a gigantic scale? I can’t believe
it, even yet. Is it ... is it all a mistake? Oh! I want
to wake up out of this nightmare; I want to wake up.
Tell me it’s a nightmare and not real.”</p>
<p>Her voice sounded almost like that of a terrified child in
the dark.</p>
<p>“It’s no nightmare,” I said. “Try to see what it meant.
There wasn’t enough food for us all. Somebody had to die
if the rest were to be saved.”</p>
<p>“And so you elected to be one of the rest? I congratulate
you. A most laudable decision, I am sure,” she
said contemptuously. “It would indeed have been a pity
if you had gone short of food in order to save the lives
of a mere score of children; tiny, helpless little things that
can’t do more than cry as they starve.”</p>
<p>“You don’t understand,” I repeated. “There was no
chance of saving them in any case. They were doomed
from the start. All we did was to ensure that <i>somebody</i>
would survive. If the food had been evenly distributed,
we should all have died; but your uncle laid his plans
to save millions of people. Surely you can see that?”</p>
<p>She thought for a moment; and then attacked in a fresh
direction.</p>
<p>“Who gave you the right to choose among them? You
seem to think you are a demi-god with the power of life
and death in your hands. How could <i>you</i> take the responsibility
of the choice? And how could you bear to save
yourself when you knew other men, and perhaps better
men, had to die? I can’t understand you. You’re so
different from what I thought you were. Somehow all
my ideals seem to be breaking. You and Uncle Stanley
were the two finest men I had met. I never dreamed
for a moment that you would turn out to have feet of
clay. And now....”</p>
<p>I tried hard to put our case before her. I explained the
state of things at the outbreak of the Famine. I gave her
figures to prove that Nordenholt had only worked to save
what he could from the disaster. It was all of no avail.
I think that the picture of the starving children filled her
mind to the exclusion of almost everything else; and that
she hardly listened to what I said. Once she whispered
to herself, “Poor little mites,” just when I thought I had
caught her attention at last. I gave it up in the end. She
looked away across the loch, where the first stars were
lighting up behind the hills; and we stood in silence, so
close in space, so remote from each other in our thoughts.
At last she spoke again.</p>
<p>“Still I don’t understand it all. I see your view; but I
can’t share it. It seems so cold-blooded, so horrible. But
I can’t understand you, just when I thought I knew you
through and through. Tell me, how could you talk of
Fata Morgana and all our dreams when you <i>knew</i> that
this terrible thing was happening? That’s what I don’t
grasp.”</p>
<p>“I can’t explain it to you. Probably I keep my mind
in compartments. But never mind about me, Elsa; I’m
done for now. I don’t matter. But you mustn’t condemn
your uncle along with me. He never led you on to dream
dreams, so you haven’t that against him. I want you to
believe me that he has been a saviour and not a destroyer,
as you seem to think. Don’t lose your faith in him until you
understand. Don’t prejudge things till you know everything.
Speak to him yourself before you come to a conclusion.
He depends on you, more than you think, perhaps. And
he’s worked himself to the bone to save those few millions
that are left to us. Don’t judge him till you know
everything.”</p>
<p>She looked at me more kindly than she had done since
the beginning.</p>
<p>“That’s just what I should have expected from what
I knew of you, Mr. Flint. You think of him first and
don’t bother about yourself. You aren’t selfish. I can’t
understand you, somehow. You seem such a mixture;
and until to-day I had no idea you were a mixture at
all. It’s all so difficult.”</p>
<p>She ended with a choke in her voice and turned towards
the car. I followed her and switched on the head-lights,
ready to start. She climbed into her seat; and I put the
rug around her knees. Just as I was on the point of starting,
she spoke again.</p>
<p>“You’ve told me all I need to know; but I must hear
it from Uncle Stanley himself. I’ll go on being his
secretary. I’ll do all I can to help. But I hate you
both. Yes, if this is true, I hate him too. What else
do you expect? You look on yourselves as saviours, it
seems. You may be that, but you certainly are murderers.
You can’t even see why I abhor you both. That shows
you the gulf between us. Oh, I hate you, I hate you,
with this cold calculation of yours: so much food, so
many lives. Is that the way to handle human destinies?
Drive on.”</p>
<p>A little further down the road, she spoke again in a
quivering voice which she strove to keep level and cold:</p>
<p>“This ends any work together. I couldn’t bear it in
your case. With Uncle Stanley it’s different. I will
go back to my old place with him. But I never want
to see <i>you</i> again, Mr. Flint. I’ve lost two illusions to-day;
and I don’t wish to be reminded of them more than I
need be. I promised him that I would always help him;
and I’m going to keep my promise, cost what it may. But
I never promised <i>you</i> anything.”</p>
<p>For a few minutes I drove on in silence. The whole
world seemed to have fallen around me. All that I had
longed for, all my future, seemed to have collapsed in
that short afternoon. I was not angry; I don’t think I
was even completely conscious of what it all meant. I
felt stunned by an unexpected blow. At last I roused
myself.</p>
<p>“Elsa,” I said, “do you remember the first evening we
met?”</p>
<p>She never moved.</p>
<p>“You sang that dirge from Cymbeline, you remember?
When you’re calmer, I want you to think over it. I
don’t want you to have any regrets. Mr. Nordenholt
can’t last for ever under this strain. Think carefully.”</p>
<p>She made no sign that she had heard me speak. The
car whirred through the dusk, while we sat silent and aloof
from each other. It was a return very different from that
which I had hoped for when I set out. I was almost glad
when, further down the loch, the beams of the head-lights
showed us the figure of Nordenholt in the road. I pulled
up the car beside him; and Elsa leaned forward in her
seat.</p>
<p>“Uncle Stanley, Mr. Flint has told me everything. I
saw a document this morning, B. 53. X. 15; and I forced
Mr. Flint to explain what it meant. Did you really plan
this awful thing?”</p>
<p>I could not see Nordenholt’s face in the shadow; but his
voice was as steady as ever in his reply. Afterwards I
realised that he must have foreseen such a situation as this
long before.</p>
<p>“It is perfectly true, Elsa. Anything that Mr. Flint has
told you is probably correct, though his connection with
the matter is very slight.”</p>
<p>“But he says that you planned it all and that he helped
you. I can’t ... I can’t quite understand it all. It’s
a mistake, isn’t it? It’s not your real plan, surely. You’re
going to save all these people in the South, aren’t you?”</p>
<p>“Every soul that can be saved by me will be saved, Elsa.
You can count on that.”</p>
<p>“But you will give them all a chance of life, won’t you?
You won’t take away all the food from them?”</p>
<p>“There’s no food to spare.”</p>
<p>For a few moments there was silence. Elsa made a
sudden movement, and I guessed that she had recoiled
from Nordenholt’s touch. At last she spoke again, in a
way I had not anticipated.</p>
<p>“Do you remember my three wishes, Uncle Stanley?
You gave me two of them and now I want the third.
You promised me the whole three; and you never broke
your word yet. I want you to save these people in the
South. That’s my third wish.”</p>
<p>I think it was that which made me realise the gulf that
yawned between us, more than anything that had gone before.
How could she imagine that Nordenholt’s vast machine
could be deflected on account of some childish promise?
And yet her voice had taken on a new tone of confidence;
everything, she thought, was going to be set right. It
seems she must have believed, even then, that the treatment
of the South was only one of a number of alternative
schemes; and that she could force the adoption of some
other, not so good, perhaps, but still possible, as a solution.
Her very belief in Nordenholt’s powers led her to assume
that he must have several plans ready pigeon-holed, and
that the rejection of one merely entailed the substitution
of some other which was already cut and dried.</p>
<p>“When that promise was made, Elsa, there was one
condition: your wish was not to be an impossible one.
This <i>is</i> impossible.”</p>
<p>“Oh!” There was such an agony in her voice that I
felt it rasp my already over-tried nerves.</p>
<p>“That is final, Elsa. There is nothing more to be
said.”</p>
<p>For almost a minute she made no reply. In the silence
I could feel her struggling for control of her voice. When
at last she spoke, she seemed to have fought down her
emotion, for her tone was almost indifferent:</p>
<p>“Very well, Uncle Stanley. You refuse to help these
people; but I am not so easy in my mind. I will go into
the South myself and do my best to help them; and if I
cannot help, I can at least take the same risks as they do. <i>I</i>
can’t stay here, well fed and well cared for when they are
suffering.”</p>
<p>“You will not do that, Elsa. No, I don’t mean to
prevent you going if you wish, though you have no idea
what you would be going to. But I haven’t brought
you up to be a shirker; and you’re needed here. You
have the whole of your work at your finger-ends and if you
go it will dislocate that department temporarily; and we
can’t afford to have even a temporary upset at this stage.
You promised you would stay, no matter what happened;
and I ask you to keep your promise now. I also tell you
that I need you, and your work here is helping to save lives
in the Area, more lives than you could ever save outside.
Now do you wish to go?”</p>
<p>She thought for a time, evidently weighing one thing and
another. While she was still silent, I broke in, wisely or
unwisely I did not know.</p>
<p>“If Elsa goes into the South, Nordenholt, I go with her
to look after her. You must find someone else to take my
place. I can’t let her go alone.”</p>
<p>Nordenholt’s voice was as calm as ever.</p>
<p>“You understand, Elsa? If you go, you take away
Mr. Flint; and although I can replace you in your department,
I doubt if I can get anyone as good as he is in his
line. Go South and you cripple one of the essential parts
of the Area. Stay here, and you help us all towards
safety—and we are not near the safety-line yet. Which is
it to be? I put no pressure on you. I only point out
what I think is your duty.”</p>
<p>I had expected some angry reply, some hurried decision
which might bring disaster in its train; but luckily things
took a different turn. I believe that the strain had been
too great for her. Now came the collapse; and before I
knew what had happened, she had broken into tears.
Nordenholt leaned over her, trying to comfort her; but it
was useless; and he let her work out her fit of emotion to
the end. At last she pulled herself together.</p>
<p>“If you are sure you need me, I will stay. But I hate
you both. I hate the work. I hate the Area and everything
in it. I’ll keep my promise to you; but things
will never be the same again.... And, oh, this morning I
was so happy.”</p>
<p>Nordenholt climbed aboard the car without another
word, and I drove on into the dark. Now and again I
heard a half-suppressed sob from the girl at my side; but
that was all. At the door of Nordenholt’s house I stopped.
Elsa left me without uttering even “Good-night.” I
watched her tall, slim figure go up the steps and disappear;
and something blinded me. I found Nordenholt standing
at the side of the car.</p>
<p>“Poor chap,” he said, with an immense pity in his voice.
“So you’re involved too? I wish it had been otherwise.
Well, well; I couldn’t hope to keep it from her much
longer at the best. But I’m very, very sorry. She’ll take
it so hard. Her type never looks at these things the way
we do.”</p>
<p>He paused and looked at me keenly in the light of the
terrace lamps. When he spoke once more, his voice
sounded very weary.</p>
<p>“Stand by me, Jack. Get your part ready in time.
Don’t flinch because of this. I’m nearly at the end of my
tether.”</p>
<p>I could not trust myself to speak. We shook hands in
silence, and he went up the steps into the house.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 class="nobreak"><small>CHAPTER XVI</small><br/>


In the Nitrogen Area</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">I have</span> no wish to dwell overmuch upon my own affairs
in this narrative; for they formed a mere ripple on the
surface of the torrent of events which was bearing all of us
along in its course. Yet to exclude them entirely would
be to omit something which is of importance; for they
must have influenced my outlook upon the situation as a
whole and possibly made me view it through eyes different
from those which I had used before.</p>
<p>My dreams and desires had come to the ground almost
ere they were in being; and what made it more bitter to
me was that I felt they had been crushed, not on their
merits, but merely as subsidiaries which had shared in the
collapse of a more central matter. I guessed that Elsa had,
to some extent, at any rate, shared my feelings; and it was
this which made the downfall of my hopes all the harder
to bear.</p>
<p>Try as I would, I could find no reason behind her
attitude; and even now, looking back upon that time, I
cannot appreciate her motives. In the whole affair of the
Nitrogen Area I had been guided by purely intellectual
considerations. Nordenholt himself had advised me to keep
a tight rein upon any feelings which might divert me from
this course. And I was thus, perhaps, less able to appreciate
her standpoint then than I would have been a few months
earlier.</p>
<p>On her side emotion, and not intellect, was the guiding
star. The picture of starving millions which had broken
upon her without warning had overpowered her normally
clear brain. Thus there lay between us a gulf which
nothing seemed capable of filling. I thought, and still
believe, that emotion is a will-o’-the-wisp by which alone
no man can steer a course; but it is useless to deny its
power when once it has laid its influence upon a mind.
Even had she given me a chance, I doubt if I would have
tried to reason with her; and she gave me no chance. I
never saw her alone; and when she met me perforce or by
accident, she treated me practically as a stranger. All the
long evenings of planning and dreaming had gone out of
our lives.</p>
<p>As soon as I could make an opportunity, I questioned
Nordenholt as to the state of affairs. He answered me
perfectly frankly.</p>
<p>“Elsa has never said a word to me about the South.
I think she shrinks from the idea even in her own mind;
and she shrinks from me because of it, as I can see. But
she sticks to her work, even if she loathes coming into
contact with me daily; and I keep her as hard at it as
I can. The less time she has to think, the better for her;
and I don’t mean to leave her any time to brood over the
affair. Poor girl, you mustn’t feel hard about her, Jack.
I can understand what it means to her; and to you also:
and her part is the saddest. She simply hates me now; I
can feel it. And neither of us can help her, that’s the worst
of it.”</p>
<p>To Nordenholt himself the situation must have been a
terrible one; for Elsa was closer to him than any other
human being could ever be: and the position now was
worse even than if he had lost her entirely. I am sure that
he had never felt anything more than affection for her;
but she had become more to him, perhaps, just for that
reason. I often used to think that they formed natural
complements for one another: he with his great build and
powerful personality, she with her slender grace and her
character, strong as his own, perhaps, but in a far different
sphere.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>It was about this period <i>B. diazotans</i> began to die out
from the face of the world which it had wrecked. I have
already told how Nordenholt had given me the news when
it was still a possibility of the future. From their studies
upon isolated colonies of the microbe, the bacteriologists
had predicted its end. They had found a rapid falling-off
in its power of multiplication; and the segregation of a
number of the pests soon led to their perishing.</p>
<p>When it became clear that <i>B. diazotans</i> was doomed,
Nordenholt began to send out scouting aeroplanes to collect
samples of soil from various districts and bring them back to
the laboratories of the Nitrogen Area where they could be
examined. All told the same tale of extinction. Gradually,
the aeroplanes were sent further and further on their
journeys into the stricken lands; and at last it became clear
that as far as a large part of Europe was concerned, the
terror was at an end. The soil, of course, was completely
ruined; but there was little to fear in the way of a
recrudescence of the blight.</p>
<p>It seems, nowadays, very strange that we had not already
foreseen this result; for the cause of it lay upon the surface
of things. Once the denitrifying bacteria had destroyed
all the nitrogen compounds in the soil, there was nothing
left for them to live upon; and they perished of starvation
in their turn, following in the track of all the larger
organisms which their depredations had ruined.</p>
<p>As soon as Nordenholt had established the definite decease
of <i>B. diazotans</i> in the accessible parts of the European continent,
he sent out the news to the whole remaining world
with which he was in touch through his wireless installation;
and after some time had been spent in various centres
in which the remnants of humanity were gathered together,
word came back from the most widely-separated areas that
all over the world <i>B. diazotans</i> had ceased to exist. In
many places it had even left no traces of any kind behind
it; for as some of the bacteria died their bodies, being nitrogenous,
had served as food for those still living; until at last
the merest trace of their organisms was all that could be
found in the soil.</p>
<p>So this plague passed from the world as swiftly as it came;
and its passing left the future more certain than seemed
possible in the early stages of its career.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>But if our gravest danger was thus removed, we in the
Nitrogen Area had other troubles which were nearer to us
at that time. In his very earliest calculations, Nordenholt,
as I have told, had foreseen that disease would be prevalent
owing to the monotony of the diet which was entailed by
our conditions. The lack of fresh vegetables and the use of
salted meat gave rise to scurvy, which we endeavoured to
ward off by manufacturing a kind of synthetic lime juice
for the population. The success of this was not complete,
however, and the disease caused a very marked falling-off in
the productive power of our labour. For a time it seemed
as though we were actually losing ground in our factories,
just at the moment when the destruction of the denitrifying
bacteria had raised our hopes to a high degree.</p>
<p>Nor was scurvy our only trouble. The debilitated health
of the people laid them open to all sorts of minor diseases,
with their concomitant decline in physical energy. Of
these, the most serious was a new type of influenza which
ravaged the Nitrogen Area and caused thousands of deaths.
Here again, a fall in output coincided with the growth and
spread of the disease; but since the death-roll was a heavy
one, the number of mouths diminished markedly as well; so
that it almost appeared as though the two factors might
balance each other. If there were less food in the future,
there would be fewer people to consume it.</p>
<p>I think the period of the influenza epidemic was one of
the most trying of all in the Nitrogen Area. As the
reported cases increased in number, individual medical
attention became impossible; for many doctors died of the
scourge, and we could not risk the total annihilation of the
medical profession. Treatment of the disease was standardised
as far as possible and committed to the care of rapidly-trained
laymen. Possibly this led to many deaths which
might have been avoided with more efficient methods; but
it was the only means which would leave us with a supply
of trained medical men who would be required in the
future.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>On the heels of the influenza epidemic, and possibly
produced by it, came a period of labour unrest in the Area.
It was only what I had always anticipated; for the strain
which we were putting upon the workers had now increased
almost to the breaking point. There was no way out of
the difficulty, however; for unless the work was done, the
safety of the whole community would be imperilled. None
the less, I could not help finding excuses in my mind for
those toiling millions. To them, the connection between
the factories and the food-supply must have been difficult to
trace; for they could hardly follow all the ramifications in
the lines between the coal in the pits and the next harvest
which was not even sown.</p>
<p>Nordenholt succeeded in stifling most of the disaffection
by means of a fresh newspaper campaign of propaganda.
He had given his journals a long period of rest in this
direction, purposely, I believe, in order that he might utilise
them more effectively when this new emergency arose. But
though he certainly produced a marked effect by his efforts,
there remained among the workers an under-current of
discontent which could not be exorcised. It was not a case
of open disaffection which could have been dealt with by
drastic methods; the Intelligence section were unable to
fasten upon any clear cases of what in the old days would
have been called sedition. It was rather a change for the
worse in the general attitude and outlook of the labouring
part of the community: an affair of atmosphere which left
nothing solid for Nordenholt to grasp firmly. Though I
was out of direct touch with affairs at the time, even I
could not help the feeling that things were out of joint.
The demeanour of the workers in the streets was somehow
different from what it had been in the earlier days.
There was a sullenness and a tinge of aggressiveness in
the air.</p>
<p>And in Nordenholt himself I noticed a corresponding
change. He seemed to me by degrees to be losing his
impersonal standpoint. The new situation appeared to be
making him more and more dictatorial as time went by.
He had always acted as a Dictator; but in his personal
contact with men he had preserved an attitude of aloofness
and certainty which had taken the edge off the Dictatorship.
Now, I noticed, his methods were becoming more direct;
and he was making certain test-points into trials of strength,
open and avowed, between himself and those who opposed
him. He always won, of course; but it was a different
state of things from that which had marked the inception of
the Nitrogen Area. There was more of the master and
less of the comrade about him now.</p>
<p>Yet, looking back upon it all, I cannot but admit that
his methods were justified. The disaffection was noticeable;
and only a strong hand could put it down. Nordenholt’s
tactics were probably the best under the circumstances; but
nevertheless they brought him into a fresh orientation with
regard to the workers. Instead of leading them, he began
more and more openly to drive them along the road which
he wished them to take.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>I see that I have omitted to mention the attempted
invasion of the Nitrogen Area from the coasts of Europe
which took place just before this. To tell the truth, it was
so complete a fiasco that it had almost passed from my
mind; but a few words may be devoted to it here.</p>
<p>When the Famine had done its work in Germany there
still remained for a time a number of inhabitants who had
seized the food in the country by force and who were thus
enabled to prolong their existence while their fellows died
out. They belonged mainly to the old military class.
When they in turn ran short of supplies, their natural
thought was to plunder someone weaker than themselves;
and learning of the existence of the Clyde Valley colony,
they determined that it furnished the most probable source of
loot. Apparently they imagined that the Fleet in the Firth
of Forth was deserted; for in order to excite no suspicion
they had kept their airships at long-range in the reconnaissances
which they undoubtedly made in advance of their
actual onset; and it seems most probable that they imagined
they had nothing to fear beyond the risks incident to the
invasion of an unprotected country. At least, so it appears to
me; and there were no survivors of the expedition from
whom the truth might have been discovered.</p>
<p>Under cover of night, they seem to have put most of
their men on board merchant ships and sailed for the British
coast at a time which would have brought them off the land
in the early hours of the morning when, no doubt, they
expected to get ashore without attracting attention, since
they must have supposed all the coastal inhabitants had
perished. Actually, however, their manœuvres had been
followed by the seaplane patrol which cruised in the North
Sea; and as soon as they left port, the Fleet was got
into a state of preparedness. The two forces met somewhere
on the high seas; the German squadron, utterly
defenceless, was sunk without any resistance worthy of the
name.</p>
<p>This was the only actual attempt at invasion which the
Nitrogen Area had to repel; for Nordenholt’s aeroplane
propaganda had checked any desire on the part of the
survivors of the Famine in this country to approach the
Clyde Valley under any conditions.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>Though Nordenholt succeeded in suppressing the outward
manifestations of labour unrest at this period, I think
it is fairly clear that he was unable to reach down to the
sources of the trouble. At the root of things lay a vague
dissatisfaction with general conditions, which it was impossible
to exorcise; and this peculiar spirit manifested itself
in all sorts of sporadic forms which gave a good deal of
trouble before they could be got under control.</p>
<p>For example, at about this time, there was an outbreak of
something akin to the dancing mania which I had seen in
London. It began by a rapid extension of normal dancing
in the halls of the city; but from this it soon passed into
revelry in the public squares at night; and finally took the
form of corybantic displays in the streets. As soon as it
began to demoralise the people, Nordenholt applied the
drastic treatment of a fire-hose to the groups of dancers;
and, between this method and ridicule, he succeeded in
stamping out the disease before it had attained dangerous
proportions.</p>
<p>But this was only one of the symptoms of the grave
troubles which were menacing the success of Nordenholt’s
plans. I do not doubt that he had foreseen the condition
into which affairs had drifted; but it seems to me that he
recognised the impossibility of eradicating the roots of the
discontent. Its origin lay in the actual material and moral
states of affairs; and without abandoning his whole scheme
it was impossible to change these things.</p>
<p>I know that during these months he stiffened the discipline
of the Labour Defence Force considerably in view of
eventualities; and he had frequent conferences with the
officers in command of its various units. I guessed, from
what I saw, that in future he intended to drive the population
into safety if he could not lead them there; and I
confess that at times I took a very gloomy view of our
chances of success.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>It was during this trying period, I think, that Nordenholt’s
young men were his greatest source of strength. He
was always in touch with them; and in some way he
seemed to draw encouragement from them while spurring
them on to further efforts. They seemed to lean on him
and yet to support him in his work; and often I felt that
without some comradeship as this our whole plans would
have been doomed to failure. The Nordenholt Gang
practically occupied all the posts of any responsibility in the
Nitrogen Area; and this, I expect, rendered the working of
the machine much smoother than it would otherwise have
been.</p>
<p>Since my new work brought me into touch with many
fresh departments, my acquaintance with Nordenholt’s men
increased; and I was amazed to find the ramifications of
his system and the super-excellence of the human material
in which he had dealt. They were all young, hardly any
were over thirty-five and most were younger; yet they
seemed to have a fund of moral courage and self-reliance
which struck me especially in those dark times. They
never seemed to doubt that in the end things would come
right. It was not that they blindly trusted in Nordenholt
to the exclusion of common sense: for they all seemed
to face the facts quite squarely. But behind their even
weighings of the situation I detected an unspoken yet whole-hearted
belief that Nordenholt would bring us through
without a hitch. Hero-worship has its uses, when it is
soundly based; and all of them, it was easy to see, had
made Nordenholt their hero. When I thought over the
many-sided nature of their activities and the differences of
personality among them, I could not help finding my view
of Nordenholt himself expanding. They were all picked
men, far above the average; their minds worked on different
lines; their interests were as divergent as the Poles: and
yet, one and all, they recognised Nordenholt as their master.
I do not mean that he excelled them in their own special
lines: for I doubt, in many cases, whether he had even a
grip of the elements of the subjects which they had made
their own. But he had been able to impress upon all these
various intellects the feeling that he was in a class by
himself; and that effect implied immense personality in him.</p>
<p>Despite their widely different fields of activity, there was
a very strong <i>esprit de corps</i> among them all; and it was not
for some time that I felt myself to be received on equal
terms with the rest. I think they felt that I was outside
their particular circle, at first. But the real passport into it
was efficiency; and when I had had time to show my
power of organisation, they accepted me at once as one of
themselves.</p>
<p>Of them all, I think Henley-Davenport interested me
most, though I can hardly put into words the reasons which
led to this attraction. I never learned how Nordenholt had
discovered him originally; but I found that when Henley-Davenport
began to open up the subject of induced radioactivity,
Nordenholt had stepped in and bought up for him
a huge supply of various radioactive materials which he
required in his work and which he had despaired of acquiring
on account of their enormous cost.</p>
<p>What struck me most about him was his fearlessness. Once
he gave me, incidentally in the course of a talk upon something
else, a suggestion of the risks which his work entailed.
It seemed to me that I would have faced half a dozen
other kinds of death rather than that one. Purely as a
matter of physiological interest, he told me that the effect of
radioactive materials on a large scale upon the human body
would exceed the worst inventions of mediæval torturers.</p>
<p>“The radiations, you know,” he said, drawing at his
cigarette. “The radiations have a knack of destroying
tissue; but they don’t produce immediate effects. The
skin remains quite healthy, to all appearances, for days after
the damage is done. Then you get festering sores appearing
on the affected parts.</p>
<p>“Well, on a large scale, the affected parts will be the
whole surface of the body; so that in itself will be pretty
bad, as you can see. Poor old Job will have to take a back
seat after this.</p>
<p>“Then, again, I expect enormous quantities of radioactive
gas will be evolved; and probably one will breathe some
of it into one’s lungs. The result of that will be rather
worse than the external injuries, of course. I doubt if a man
will last half an hour under that treatment; but that half-hour
will be the limit in pain.”</p>
<p>“Can’t you use a mask or some lead protection?” I
asked. “Or could you not fix up the whole thing in a
bomb-proof case which would keep the rays from things
outside?”</p>
<p>“Well, that’s the first thing one thinks of, naturally;
but to tell the truth it’s impracticable for various reasons.
Some of them are implicit in the nature of the processes I’m
using; but even apart from that, look at the state of affairs
when the thing does go off with a bang. It will be one
of the biggest explosions, considering the amounts I have to
use; and if I’m going to be flung about like a child’s toy, I
prefer to fly light and not have a sheet of lead mail to go
along with me and crush me when I strike anything. As to
a mask, nothing would stick on. You would simply be
asking to have your face driven in, if you wore anything
of the kind.</p>
<p>“No, I’ve been lucky so far. I’ve only lost three fingers
in a minor burst-up. And I’m going to stake on my luck
rather than risk certain damage. But if I can only pull
it off, Flint.... Nordenholt thinks a lot of it; and I don’t
want to disappoint him if I can help it. If I do go to glory,
I’ll at least leave something behind me which will make it
more than worth while.”</p>
<p>Nordenholt, I learned later, <i>did</i> “think a lot of it.” I
spoke to him on the subject one day; and I was astonished
to find how much stress he laid on the Henley-Davenport
work.</p>
<p>“You don’t realise it, Jack; but it’s just on the cards that
our whole future turns on Henley-Davenport. I see things
coming. They’re banking up on the horizon already; and
if the storm bursts, nothing but Henley-Davenport can save
us. And the worst of it is that he doesn’t seem to be getting
ahead much at present. It’s no fault of his. No one could
work harder; and the other two—Struthers and Anderson—are
just as keen. But it doesn’t come out, somehow. And
the tantalising thing is that he has proved it <i>can</i> be done;
only at present it isn’t economical. He gets energy
liberated, all right; but where we need a ton of gunpowder,
he can only give us a percussion cap, so to speak. If only
he can hit on it in time....”</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>For my own part, that period was depressing. All the
joy had gone out of my work. Only after I had lost her
did I realise how great a part Elsa had played in my
planning of the future. Her disappearance cast a shade over
all my schemes; and soon I gave up entirely the side of the
reconstruction in which we had collaborated. I could not
bear to think over again the lines along which we had
worked so intimately in common. I simply put them out of
my mind and concentrated my attention exclusively upon
the material aspects of the problem.</p>
<p>I have said this quite freely; though possibly the reader
may look upon me as a weak man for allowing such factors
to enter into so vast a matter. Had I been superhuman, no
doubt, I could have shut my mind to the past; and gone
forward without flinching. But I never imagined that I
was a super-man; and at this time especially I felt anything
but superhuman. I was wounded to the quick; and all I
desired was to avoid the whole subject of Elsa in my
thoughts. And when I come to think of it, it seems quite
probable that I did my best work in this way. If I had
continued to dream of Fata Morgana and all its wonders,
I should simply have drugged myself with a mental opiate
and my work would have suffered on other sides.</p>
<p>Elsa’s whole attitude to Nordenholt and myself had been
a puzzle. I could not understand why she should have been
so bitter against us; for try as I could, I failed to see
anything discreditable in our doings. The logic of events
had thrust us into the position we occupied, it seemed to
me; and I could not appreciate her view of the situation.</p>
<p>Nordenholt kept silence on the subject for some days after
our trip up Loch Lomond; but he finally gave me his
views in reply to urgent questioning.</p>
<p>“I think it’s something like this, Jack: from what I
know of Elsa in the past, she’s got a vivid imagination, very
vivid; and it happens to be the pictorial imagination. Give
her a line of description, and she has the power of calling
up the scene in her mind, filling in missing details and
producing something which impresses her profoundly.”</p>
<p>“Well, I don’t see what that’s got to do with calling
me a brute,” I said. “It doesn’t seem to help me
much.”</p>
<p>“It’s quite clear to me. The few details she got from
that confounded missorted form were enough to start her
imagination. She instinctively called up a vision of starving
people, suffering children and all the rest of the affairs in the
South. And you know, Jack, these visions of hers are
wonderfully clear and sharp. It wasn’t you who built Fata
Morgana on these afternoons; it was her imagination that
did it and you followed in her track.”</p>
<p>“Yes, you’re quite right, Nordenholt. I don’t think I
would have so much as thought of dream-cities if she hadn’t
led the way. And she certainly had the knack of making
them seem concrete.”</p>
<p>“Very well; assume she had this vision of starving
humanity. You know her type of mind—everything for
others? What sort of effect would that picture produce
upon her? A tremendous revulsion of feeling, eh? Her
whole emotional side would be up in arms; and she has
strong emotions, though she doesn’t betray them. Her
intellectual side didn’t get a chance against the combination
of that picture and her ideals. It was simply swept out at
once.</p>
<p>“But in spite of all her emotions, she’s level-headed.
Sooner or later she’ll begin to think more calmly. And
she’s very just, too. That ought to help, I think. Oh, I
don’t despair about her; or rather, I wouldn’t despair about
her if it weren’t for some things that are coming yet. I’m
not going to buoy you up with any hopes, Jack, for I believe
in dealing straight. I can’t let you hope for much; we’ve
both lost enormously in her eyes. But I’ve seen cases in
which her imagination misled her before and her reason
came out in the end. It may be so this time. But don’t
expect anything, Jack; and don’t try to gain anything.
She’s a very straight girl, and if she finds she has been wrong
she won’t hesitate to come and admit it to you without any
encouragement on your part. But it has been a horrible
affair for her; and you must remember that, if you think
hardly of her at times.”</p>
<p>“<i>I</i> think hardly of her! You don’t know me, Nordenholt,
or you wouldn’t say that.”</p>
<p>“Well, for both our sakes, I hope her intellect will get
control of her feelings. I hate to see her going about her
work and know that she has lost all faith in me now. She
was the one creature in the world that loved me, you know,
Jack; and it’s hard.”</p>
<p>Then he laughed contemptuously, as though at his own
weakness.</p>
<p>“It’s quite evident I’m not the man I was, Jack. But
somehow, in this affair we’re both in the same boat to some
extent; and I let that slip out. You see that Elsa hasn’t
the monopoly of an emotional temperament!”</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>All great undertakings with uncertain ends appear to run
the same course. First there is the period of inception, a
time of high hopes and eager toil and self-sacrifice; then,
as the novelty wears away, there follows a stage in which
the first enthusiasm has died down and an almost automatic
persistence takes the place of the great emotional driving-force
of the early days; later still, when enthusiasm has
vanished, there comes a time when the meaner side of
human nature reasserts itself. My narrative has reached the
point of junction between these last two divisions; and the
pages which I have yet to write must perforce deal mainly
with the troubles which beset us in the period of lassitude
and nerve-strain which followed naturally upon the other
phases of the situation.</p>
<p>I have thrown this chapter into a series of isolated sections;
for I believe that such a treatment best suggests the state
of things at the time. We had lost the habit of connected
thought, as far as the greater events were concerned. Our
daily round absorbed our attention; and it was only
occasionally that we were jarred out of our grooves by some
event of salient importance.</p>
<p>The whole atmosphere which surrounded us was depressing;
and it slowly and surely made its impression upon
our minds and formed the background upon which our
thoughts moved. The gloom of the smoke-filled sky had
its reaction upon our psychology. The old sunlight seemed
to have vanished from our lives. And at this time we were
all beginning to pay the price for the feverish activity of the
earlier days in the Area. Our work, whether mental or
physical, wearied us sooner than before; and its monotony
irritated our nerves. Such recreations as we had—and they
were few enough at this time—failed to relieve the tension.
Among the labouring classes, in particular, this condition of
lassitude showed itself in a marked degree.</p>
<p>Nordenholt, with his finger on the pulse of things, grew
more and more anxious as time went on. On the surface,
he still appeared optimistic; but from chance phrases here
and there I deduced that his uneasiness was increasing; and
that he anticipated something which I myself could not
foresee. Knowing what I do now, it seems to me that in
those days I must have been blind indeed not to understand
what was before us; but I frankly confess that I missed the
many signs which lay in our path from day to day. When
the disaster came upon us, it took me almost completely by
surprise.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 class="nobreak"><small>CHAPTER XVII</small><br/>


Per Iter Tenebricosum</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">After</span> Elsa had rejected any further collaboration with
me, I was forced at times to consult Nordenholt upon certain
points in my schemes which seemed to me to require the
criticism of a fresh mind; and I thus fell into the habit of
seeing him in his office at intervals.</p>
<p>“Things are in a bad way, Jack,” he said to me at the
end of one of these interviews. “You don’t see everything
that’s going on, of course; so you couldn’t be expected to
be on the alert for it; but it’s only right to warn you that
we’re coming up against the biggest trouble we’ve had
yet in the Area.”</p>
<p>“Of course things are anything but satisfactory, I know,”
I replied. “The output’s going down and there seems to
be no way of screwing the men up to increase it. But is
it really fatal, do you think? We seem even now to have
the thing well in hand.”</p>
<p>I glanced up at the great Nitrogen Curve above the fireplace.
The red and green lines upon it appeared to me to
show a state of affairs which, if not all that we could wish,
was at least satisfactory as compared with what might have
been. Nordenholt followed my glance.</p>
<p>“That practical trend of mind which you have, Jack,
sometimes keeps you from seeing realities. What lies at
the root of the trouble just now isn’t output or slackness or
anything like that. These are only symptoms of the real
disease. It’s not in the concrete things that I see the danger,
except indirectly. The true peril comes from the intangibles;
ideas, states of mind, sub-conscious reflections. I’ve told you
often that the material world is only the outward show
which hardly matters: the real things are the minds of the
men who live in it. It’s their movements you need to look
at if you want to gauge affairs.”</p>
<p>“I stick to what I know, Nordenholt, as I’ve often told
you. I’m no psychologist; and I have to look on the
material side because I’m out of my depth in the other.
But let’s hear what you have in your mind about the state
of affairs.”</p>
<p>“Well, you’ve been busy enough with your own work;
so probably you haven’t had time to observe how things
are going; but I can put the thing in a nutshell. We’ve
weathered a good many difficulties; but now we’re up
against the biggest of them all. I see all the signs of a
revival in the near future—and it isn’t going to be a Christian
revival. It spells trouble of the worst description.”</p>
<p>Now that my attention had been drawn to the point, a
score of incidents flashed across my mind in confirmation
of what he said. I had noticed an increased attendance at
the meetings of street-preachers; and also a growth in the
number of the preachers themselves. As I went about the
city in the evenings I had seen in many places knots of
people assembled round some speaker who, with emotion-contorted
visage, was striving to move them by his
eloquence.</p>
<p>Once I had even stopped for a few minutes to listen to
a sermon being preached outside the Central Station by the
Reverend John P. Wester; and I still remembered the
effect which it had produced upon me. He was a tall man
with a flowing red beard and a voice which enabled him to
make himself heard to huge audiences in the open air. He
repelled me by the cloudiness of his utterances—I hate loose
thinking—and also by the touch of fanaticism which clung
to his discourses; for I instinctively detest a fanatic. Yet
in spite of this I felt strangely attracted by him. He had
the gift of gripping his hearers; and I could see how he
played upon them as a great musician plays upon a favourite
instrument. Remotely he reminded me of Nordenholt in
the way in which he seemed to know by instinct the points
to which his rhetorical attacks should be directed; but the
resemblance between the two men ended at this. It was
always reason to which Nordenholt appealed in the end;
whilst emotional chords were the ones which the Reverend
John fingered with success.</p>
<p>“Now you’ve told me, I believe you’re right,” I said.
“I <i>have</i> seen signs of something like a revival. The crowds
seem to be taking a greater interest in religion.”</p>
<p>“I wish they would,” Nordenholt returned, abruptly.
“They won’t get it from the Reverend John. He’s out
for something quite different. It’s just what I feared would
happen, sooner or later. It always crops up under conditions
like those we are in just now. We’ve strained the human
machine to its utmost in all this work; and we’re on the
edge of possibilities in the way of collective hysteria.</p>
<p>“Now that man Wester is at the root of half the trouble
we are having just now. I don’t mean that he is creating
it; nothing of that sort: but his personality forms a centre
round which the thing collects. The thing itself is there
anyway: but if it weren’t for him and some others, it would
remain fluid; it wouldn’t become really dangerous. But
Wester is a fanatic and with his oratorical powers he carries
the weaker people off their feet, especially the women.
He’s got a following. What worries me is, where he’s
going to lead them. He’s got a kink in him. Still, I’m
trusting that we may be able to weather the thing without
using force even now. But if he goes too far, I’ll break
him like <i>that</i>.”</p>
<p>He tapped a stick of sealing wax on his desk and broke
it in two. Again I reflected how unlike this was to the
Nordenholt I had known at first, the man who could unfold
huge plans without so much as a gesture to help out his
meaning. He must have read the thought in my eyes, for
he laughed, half at himself, I think.</p>
<p>“Quite right, Jack. These theatrical touches seem to
be growing on me, of late. I must really try to cure myself.
But, all the same, I mean to keep my eye on the Reverend
John. If he sets up as a prophet—and I expect he will do
that one of these days—I’ll take the risk and put him down.
But it’s a tricky business, I can tell you. Until he actually
becomes dangerous, I shall let him go on.”</p>
<p>It was only natural, after that, for me to take more interest
in the career of the Reverend John. I even attended one
of his open-air meetings from start to finish; and I was still
more impressed by his command over his hearers. The
material of his sermons seemed to me commonplace in the
extreme: it was not by the novelty of his subjects but by
his personal force that he impressed his audiences and raised
them to a state of exaltation. Zion, the River, The Tree
of Life, Eden, the loosing of burdens, rest and joy eternal:
all the old phrases were utilised. From what I heard of his
preaching, it seemed to me innocuous. A brief time of
suffering and sorrow upon earth and then the heavens would
open and the Elect would enter into their endless happiness:
these appeared to be the elements of the creed which he
expounded; and I could see little reason for Nordenholt’s
anxiety.</p>
<p>At last, however, I began to notice something novel in the
sermons. The change came so gradually that I could hardly
be sure when it began. Probably he had opened up his
fresh line so tentatively that I had not observed it at the
time; and it was only after he had already been changing
step by step in his subject that I became clearly conscious
of his new tone.</p>
<p>With the greatest skill he contrived to use the old expressions
while inflecting them with a fresh intention. At last,
however, there could be no doubt as to his meaning. It
was no longer Christianity that he preached, but a kind of
bastard Buddhism. Up to that point in his career he had
spoken of earthly affairs as a trial through which we must
pass in order to attain to bliss in the Hereafter; but in his
newer phase the things of the material world became
entirely secondary.</p>
<p>Eternal rest, eternal joy, eternal peace: these were his
main themes; and to the exhausted and nerve-racked population
they had an attraction of the most subtle kind. The
Reverend John was a psychologist like Nordenholt, though
he worked in a narrower groove; and he well knew how
to utilise the levers of the human consciousness. Eternal
rest! What more attractive prospect could be held out to
that toil-worn race?</p>
<p>Slowly, with the most gradual of transitions, he began to
assume the mantle of a prophet; and with that phase new
names began to emerge in his discourses. The Four Truths,
the Middle Path, the Five Hindrances, Arahatship, Karma:
these cropped up from time to time in sermons which were
daily becoming wilder in their phraseology.</p>
<p>I have no wish to be unfair to the Reverend John. He
was a fanatic; and no fanatic is entirely sane. I am sure,
also, that in the earlier stages of his campaign he strove
merely for the spiritual good of the people as he understood
it. But it is necessary to say also that I believe he became
crazed in the end; and that the ultimate effect of his
preaching led us to the very edge of disaster. It is not for
me to weigh or judge him; he preferred his visions to
material safety; whilst my own mind is concerned more
with the things of this earth than with what may come
later.</p>
<p>His preaching now passed into a stage where even I could
appreciate its dangerous character. More and more, his
sermons took the form of belittlings of the material world;
while the joys of eternal life were held up in comparison.
It was not long until he was openly questioning whether
our human existence was worth prolonging at all. Would
it not be better, he asked, to throw off these shackles of the
Flesh at once rather than live for a few years longer amid
the sorrows and temptations of this world? Why not
discard this earthly mantle and enter at once into Nirvana?</p>
<p>This appeared to me a mere preaching of suicide; but if
his followers chose to adopt his suggestions, it seemed to me
a matter for themselves. I had always regarded suicide as
the back-door out of life; though I had never under-estimated
the courage of those who turn its handle. Yet
it seemed to me evidence of a certain want of toughness of
fibre, a lack of fitness to survive; and, personally, I had no
desire to retain in the world anyone who seemed unable to
bear its strains.</p>
<p>His next phase of development, however, opened my eyes.
By this time he had become a great power among the
people. Many a king has been treated with less reverence
than his followers showed to him. Crowds flocked to his
meetings, standing thickly even when they stretched far
beyond the reach of that magnificent voice. In the streets
he was saluted as though he were a superhuman agent.
There were attempts made to get him to touch the sick in
the hope that he might heal them.</p>
<p>From afar, Nordenholt watched all this rising surge of
emotion. In some ways, the two men resembled each
other; but their motives were wide apart as the Poles.
Both had their ideals, higher than the normal; but these
ideals were in deadly antagonism to each other. Both, it is
possible, were right; but the clash of right with right is the
highest form of tragedy; and collision between them was
inevitable.</p>
<p>“The Reverend John has been a great disappointment to
me, Jack,” Nordenholt admitted to me one day. “That
man has the makings of a great demagogue or a great saint
in him; and it seems to me that the spin of the coin has
gone against me, for I thought the saint would come uppermost.
He isn’t as big as I thought he was. His head has
been turned by all this adulation; and unless I am mistaken
again we shall find him becoming a public danger before
very long. He thinks he has his own work to do, preparing
for the Kingdom of Heaven; and in doing that he seems to
sweep aside all earthly affairs as trifles. He despises them.
I don’t. To me, he seems to be like a child in a game who
won’t abide by the rules. His heaven may be all right;
but if it is to be attained by shirking one’s work on earth—not
<i>striving</i> to live—it seems to me a poor business. I think
life is important, or it wouldn’t exist; and I’m working to
keep it in existence. He seems to believe it is of no value,
if he really means what he says. We can’t agree, that’s
evident.”</p>
<p>It was not long before the Reverend John’s campaign
filled even my mind with apprehension. His style of
preaching changed and grew more incoherent; his phraseology
became wilder; and a minatory tone crept into his
sermons. And the tremendous personality of the speaker,
coupled with all the art of the orator, made even these
obscure ravings powerful to influence the minds of his
hearers.</p>
<p>He began to speak of curses from heaven upon a generation
which had forgotten the right path. The Famine was
a sign that all life was to be swept from the earth’s face.
And thence he passed to the proposition that any struggling
against the Famine was a hindrance to the workings of the
universe.</p>
<p>I think that it was about this time that he discarded
ordinary clothes and began to go about clad in a curious
garment manufactured from the skin of some animal.
Except for his fiery beard, he recalled the sandal-shod John
the Baptist represented in old illustrated Bibles. Nor was
he alone in this fashion: some of his more prominent
adherents also adopted it, though in their cases the results
were not so imposing.</p>
<p>And now things moved rapidly towards their end.</p>
<p>The Reverend John preached daily in the streets, predicting
a universal entry into Nirvana. His curses against
those who worked for the physical salvation of the people to
the detriment of their Karma became louder and more
frequent; and it was not long until he spent most of his
energies in comminations. From cursings, he passed to
threats; and his attacks upon Nordenholt grew in vehemence
day by day. And still Nordenholt, to my growing
wonder, held his hand and forbore to strike.</p>
<p>By this time the religious mania was spreading rapidly
throughout the population of the Area. The skin-clad
followers of the Reverend John ran nightly through the
streets crying that the Great Day was at hand and calling
upon the people to repent of their sins and turn to righteousness.
Strange scenes were witnessed; and stranger doctrines
preached. It was a weird time.</p>
<p>Meanwhile, the preaching of the revivalist was becoming
more and more exalted. He named himself a Prophet, the
last and the greatest. He began to be more definite in his
predictions; events which he foreshadowed were foretold as
coming to pass at stated dates. At last he gave out that
three days later he and his followers would publicly ascend
to heaven in a cloud of glory; and that the world of
earthly things would pass away as he did so.</p>
<p>And still Nordenholt held his hand. I could not understand
it; for by this time I had seen where the teaching of
the Reverend John was leading us. Work was slowing
down in the factories; crowds of all classes were spending
their whole time following their Prophet; and the mere
numbers of them were becoming a serious menace to the
safety of the Area. At last I became so anxious on the
subject that I went to consult Nordenholt on the matter.
I had begun to doubt if he appreciated the gravity of the
situation.</p>
<p>I found him sitting before the fire in his office, smoking
and gazing before him as though wrapped in his reflections.</p>
<p>“Look here, Nordenholt,” I said. “I suppose you grasp
the seriousness of affairs nowadays? Isn’t it about time
something was done? It seems to me that you’ll need to
grasp this nettle before long anyway. Why let it grow any
bigger?”</p>
<p>“Afraid I’m losing my grip, eh? Not yet, Jack, not
yet awhile. But I will <i>grasp</i> it before long. I’m only
waiting the proper moment. I’ve waited for weeks; and
now I think it’s nearly due at last.”</p>
<p>“But the man’s insane, Nordenholt. You see that, don’t
you? Why wait any longer. Grab him now and be done
with it—at least that’s what I should do if I were in
charge.”</p>
<p>“No, I’m going to give him three days more. If I
interfered now, it would spoil everything. Wait till he
has seen his prophecy fail, and then we can tackle him.”</p>
<p>“I don’t see any use waiting; but I suppose you know
best.”</p>
<p>“I do know best, Jack, believe me. Come back here in
three days, at half-past eleven, and you’ll see my methods.
I’m going to teach these people a lesson this time.”</p>
<p>He leaned back in his chair and fixed his eyes on the old
stone image of the Pope’s head which, under its glass bell,
forms part of the mantelpiece.</p>
<p>“What differences there are in the way religion works on
a man, Jack. There was an old chap in the dark ages,
that Pope; and he believed in spreading the light by education.
He founded the University here. And then you
have this fanatic to-day whose one idea seems to be to
reduce everything to chaos again. What a difference!
And yet each of them thinks that he is inspired to do the
right thing in his day.”</p>
<p>He threw away the end of his cigar and rose.</p>
<p>“Come back in three days, Jack. You’ll see it all then.
I needn’t explain it now.”</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>The events of the following two days filled me with
uneasiness; and I began to fear that for once Nordenholt
had erred in his calculations. The tumult and agitation
centring around the figure of the revivalist increased; his
preaching became more and more menacing; and it seemed
to me that he had been allowed too much rope. By this
time he was quite frankly attacking the whole scheme of
the Nitrogen Area as an act of impiety which would call
down the wrath of the Divinity in the immediate future.
And mingled with these cursings he poured forth his
prophecies, which grew hourly more detailed. He and his
Elect would ascend into the sky at noon, he declared; and
that all men might see this come about, he proposed to take
his stand by the Roberts’ statue in Kelvingrove Park, from
which eminence he would be visible to the assembled
crowds.</p>
<p>Rumours ran through the Area, growing wilder and yet
more wild as they passed from lip to lip. Even the most
unimaginative of the population felt the strange electric power
which seemed to flow out from the revivalist; and the tales
of his doings were magnified and distorted out of all
semblance of reality. Just as Nordenholt had predicted,
all the formless unrest of the Area crystallised round the
personality of the preacher and took shape and substance.
Work was abandoned by the greater part of the Area
labour; and the factories, usually thronged by shift after
shift, remained almost untenanted during those two days in
which the populace awaited the promised miracle.</p>
<p>Meanwhile the followers of the revivalist redoubled their
efforts and their conduct grew less and less restrained. The
labourers who remained at work were assaulted by bands
of these fanatics, and driven from the doors of the factories.
Order seemed to have vanished from the Area; for I found
that Nordenholt had withdrawn the Labour Defence Force
entirely from the streets, allowing the madmen to do their
will. It seemed as though the Area were being permitted
to relapse into chaos.</p>
<p>The uninterrupted preaching of the revivalist had wrought
the whole population into a state of strained expectation.
Even those who scoffed at his claims were affected by the
atmosphere of the time; and there was in most minds an
uneasy questioning: “Suppose that it should all be true?”</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>At half-past eleven, I went to Nordenholt’s office as I
had promised. He was alone, seated at his huge desk.
The usual mass of papers had been cleared away and I
noticed that their place had been taken by a small piece of
apparatus like a telephone in some respects and an ordinary
electric bell-push on a wooden stand. Temporary wires
ran from these to the window.</p>
<p>“Come in, Jack. You’re just in time for the curtain.”</p>
<p>“It seems to me, Nordenholt, that the curtain ought to
have been rung down on this thing long ago. You’ve
waited far too long, if you ask me.”</p>
<p>“I don’t think I’ve miscalculated. And to tell you the
truth, Jack, this is the biggest thing I’ve had to think out so
far. It’s make or break with us this time; and we’ve never
been as near disaster before. But I’ve thought it out; and
I believe I’m right. Have a cigar.”</p>
<p>He pushed a box across to me and I cut and lit one
mechanically.</p>
<p>“This thing here,” he tapped the instrument, “is a
dictaphone. The transmitter’s fixed up in the statue over
there.”</p>
<p>He nodded in the direction of the Park below our
windows. I got up and looked out. As far as my view
reached, the ground was concealed by a closely-packed crowd
of people, all standing motionless and intent upon the group
on the open space around the statue. There had been some
singing of hymns earlier in the morning; but now the vast
concourse had fallen silent as their expectation rose to fever-heat
and the hour of the miracle drew near.</p>
<p>“I’m going to give him every chance,” said Nordenholt’s
voice behind me. “Let him pull off his miracle if he can.
If he can’t, then I expect trouble; and at the first word of
danger I hear, I’ll settle with him at last. I don’t mind
his preaching suicide; but if he starts to threaten the work
of the Area, it will be on his own head.”</p>
<p>The three-quarters had struck from the great bells above
our heads; and, a few minutes later, Nordenholt switched
on the dictaphone. Suddenly the clarion voice of the
revivalist seemed to fill the room in which we stood.</p>
<p>“My brothers! In a few brief moments I shall leave
you, ascending in glory to the skies. While I am yet with
you, heed my words. Turn from this idle show which
blinds your eyes. Turn from this heavy labour and unceasing
toil. Turn from this valley of sin and sorrow. Turn
from the lusts of the flesh and the lures of material things.
Long and weary has been the way; life after life have we
suffered, but when we pass into Nirvana there is rest for
you, rest for each of you, eternal rest! O my brothers, all
that are worn with the bearing of burdens, all that are taxed
beyond your powers, all that are a-faint and borne down,
follow after me into Nirvana, where none shall be a-weary and
where all shall rest. There shall be no more toil, no more
fatigue, no more striving and no more labour. There shall
be rest, everlasting rest, a long sweet slumber under the
trees, while the river flows by your feet and its murmur lulls
you in your eternal rest.”</p>
<p>Even in the harsh reproduction of the dictaphone I could
feel the magic of the cadences of that splendid voice, soothing,
comforting, promising the multitude the prize which to
them must have seemed the most desirable of all. And
through it all the steady repetition of “Rest” ran with an
almost hypnotic effect. Incoherent though it was, the
appeal struck at the very centre of each over-driven being in
that throng.</p>
<p>“Rest, rest for all. Surcease of toil. Do you not feel it
already, my brothers? Languor creeps over you; you
faint as you stand. And I promise rest to you all. Follow
me and you shall rest in those fields; there where you may
dream away the long, long days among the flowers, lying at
ease. There where the songs of birds shall but stir you
faintly in your dreams, and all the tumult of the world shall
be stilled within your ears.”</p>
<p>He paused; and the silence seemed almost like a continuation
of his speech. The multitude seemed frozen into
stone. Then came an isolated phrase:</p>
<p>“Into Nirvana; Nirvana where there is rest....”</p>
<p>The voice died away in a soothing murmur which yet
had its compelling power. Nordenholt looked at his watch.</p>
<p>“Two minutes yet. So far, he hasn’t been actively
objectionable; but I can guess what is coming.”</p>
<p>Again the dictaphone sounded.</p>
<p>“But a few moments now, my brothers, then I and my
Elect shall ascend into the skies. Look well, O my
brothers. Mark our passage to our rest.”</p>
<p>His voice ceased. There was a dead silence. Then,
suddenly, with a preliminary vibration of machinery, the
clock above us struck. Four double chimes for the quarters
and then the heavy note of the hour-strokes. Nordenholt
listened grimly until all twelve had been rung. Then I
heard his voice, even as ever, without the faintest tinge of
irony:</p>
<p>“The passing bell!”</p>
<p>With the twelfth stroke there came through the windows
a great wave of indescribable sound, the loosing of breath
among the thousands who were gathered far below us in the
Kelvin valley. Then again there was silence. Nordenholt
suddenly leaned forward to his desk and placed his finger on
the ivory button.</p>
<p>“Now’s the danger-point, Jack. He’ll try to divert
attention from his failure. But I’m ready for him.”</p>
<p>I began mechanically to count seconds, with no particular
reason, but simply because I felt I must do something.
Two minutes passed; and then through the
windows came a long groaning note, the voice of the multitude
smitten with disillusion at the failure of the miracle
which they had expected. It rolled in a huge volume of
sound across the Park and then died away.</p>
<p>Suddenly the dictaphone poured out a torrent of words.
The voice was no longer calm; all the quiet strength had
gone out of it, and, instead, the tones were those of an
infuriated man seeking some object upon which to wreak
his anger. But with all his rage the Reverend John had a
ready mind. In a moment he seems to have seen a possible
loophole of escape.</p>
<p>“No!” he cried, “I will not ascend for yet awhile.
Work remains to be done here, in this godless city; and I
will renounce my rest until it has been brought to its end.
Life must cease ere I can seek my rest. I bid you follow
me that we may accomplish the task which has been laid
upon me. Over yonder”—he evidently pointed towards
us—“over yonder sits the Arch-Enemy; he who strives
to chain pure spirits in this web of flesh. His hand is on
all this city, so that the smoke of her burning goes up to the
skies. Break asunder the chains which he is forging.
Destroy the evil works which he has planned. Wreck the
engines which he has designed. Come, my brothers; the
doom is pronounced against all the works of his hand.
Come, follow me and end it all. Destroy! Destroy! so
that this world of sorrow and of sin may pass away like an
evil vision and life may be no more. Destroy! Destroy!”</p>
<p>Nordenholt, listening intently, pressed his finger upon the
ivory stud. There was a moment’s pause, and then from
the eastern end of the building came a sound of machine-guns.
It lasted only for a few seconds and then died out.</p>
<p>“They couldn’t miss at that range,” said Nordenholt.
“That’s the end of the Reverend John personally. But I
doubt if we are finished with him altogether even now.”</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 class="nobreak"><small>CHAPTER XVIII</small><br/>


The Eleventh Hour</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">I have</span> set down all my doubts as to the wisdom of
Nordenholt’s treatment of the Reverend John; and it is
only right to place on the other side the fact that events
proved he had gauged matters better than I had done. He
had foreseen the trend of the revivalist’s thoughts and had
deduced their climax, probably long before Wester himself
had understood the road he had placed his feet upon.
Nordenholt had allowed the excitement to grow without
check, even to its highest point, without interfering in the
least; because he calculated that the supreme disillusion
would produce a revulsion of feeling which could be attained
in no other way. And his calculation proved to be correct.
Morally shaken by the failure of the miracle which they
had been led to expect, and which many of them had
counted upon with certainty, the populace allowed itself to
be driven back into the factories and mines without a word of
protest. Their dreams were shattered and they fell back
into reality without the strength to resist any dominant will.
It seemed as though the last difficulties were disappearing
before us; and that the path now led straight onward to our
goal. So I thought, at least, but Nordenholt doubted.
And, as it turned out, he again saw more clearly than I.
We might be done with the Reverend John; but the
Reverend John had not finished with us, dead as he was.</p>
<p>The next ten days saw the institution of a merciless
system in the works and mines of the Area. During the
period of the revivalist’s activity there had been an
accelerated fall in the output; and Nordenholt determined
that this must be made good as soon as possible. Possibly also
he believed that a spell of intense physical exertion would
exhaust the workers and leave them no time to indulge in
recollections and reflections which might be dangerous.
Whatever his motives may have been, his methods were
drastic in the extreme. The minimum necessary output
was trebled; and the members of any group who failed to
attain it were promptly deported into the desert of the
South. Surely entrenched behind the loyalty of the Labour
Defence Force, Nordenholt threw aside any concealment
and ruled the whole Area as a despot. The end in view
was all that he now seemed to see; and he broke men and
threw them aside without the slightest hesitation. More
than ever, it seemed to me at this time, he was like a
machine, rolling forward along its appointed path, careless of
all the human lives and the human interests which he
ground to powder under his irresistible wheels. I began to
think of him at times in the likeness of Jagannatha, the
Lord of the World, under whose car believers cast themselves
to death. But none of Nordenholt’s victims were
willing ones.</p>
<p>Unlimited power, as Nordenholt himself had pointed out
to me, is a perilous gift to any man. The human mind is
not fitted for strains of this magnitude; and even Nordenholt’s
colossal personality suffered, I believe, from the stress
of his despotic rule. But where a smaller man would have
frittered away his energies in petty oppression or aimless
regulation, Nordenholt never lost sight of his main objective:
and I believe that his harshness in the end arose merely from
his ever-growing determination to bring his enterprise to
success. Concentrating his mind entirely upon this, he may
have suffered from a loss of perspective which made him
ruthless in his demands upon the labouring masses of the
Area. If this were so, I cannot find it in me to blame him,
in view of the responsibility which he bore. But I have a
suspicion that he feared a coming disaster, and that he was
determined to take time by the forelock by forcing up
production ere the catastrophe overtook us.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>After the death of the revivalist, his followers disappeared.
The meetings at street corners no longer took place; the
wild skin-clad figures ran no more through the city. I
believe that Nordenholt took steps to arrest those of the
inner circle who escaped the machine-guns in the Park;
but many of them seem to have slipped through his fingers
in spite of the efficiency of his Secret Service. Probably
they were kept in concealment by sympathisers, of whom
there were still a number in spite of the general disillusionment.
On the surface, the whole movement appeared to
have been arrested completely; but, as we were to learn, it
was not blotted out.</p>
<p>I can still remember the first news of the disaster. A
trill on my telephone bell, and then the voice of Nordenholt
speaking:</p>
<p>“Hullo!... That you, Jack?... Come over here,
will you?... At my office. I may need you.... It’s a
bad affair.... What?... Two of the pit-shafts have
been destroyed. No way of reaching the crowd underground.
I’m afraid it’s a bad business.”</p>
<p>When I reached his office he was still at the telephone,
evidently speaking to the scene of the catastrophe.</p>
<p>“Yes?... Shaft closed completely?... How long
do you think it will take to reopen it?... Permanent?
Mean to say you can’t reopen it?... Months?...
How many men below just now?... Six hundred, you
think?... That’s taking the number of lamps missing, I
suppose.... Well, find out exactly as soon as you can.”</p>
<p>He rang off and was just about to call up another number,
the second pit, I suppose, when the telephone bell sounded
an inward call.</p>
<p>“Yes?... What’s that? Numbers what?... Three,
seven, eight, ten, thirteen, fourteen.... Ring off! I’ll
speak to you again.”</p>
<p>He rang furiously for the exchange.</p>
<p>“Put me through to the Coal Control. Quick, now....
Hullo! Is that you, Sinclair?... Nordenholt.... Send
out a general call. Bring every man to the surface at once....
Yes, every pit in the Area. Hurry! It’s life or
death.... Report when you get news.”</p>
<p>Without leaving the instrument he called up another
number.</p>
<p>“Go on. No. 14 was the last.... Take down these
numbers, Jack.... 3, 7, 8, 10, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19.... That
all?... Good. Get me the figures of losses as
soon as you can. Also a note of the damage. Good-bye.”</p>
<p>Behind this disjointed sequence of phrases I had caught
hints of the magnitude of the calamity; and I was to some
extent prepared for what I heard when he had time to turn
to me at last.</p>
<p>“Eleven pits have been destroyed almost simultaneously,
Jack. No. 23 and No. 27 went first; and then that list
I gave you just now. There are no details yet; but it’s
quite evidently malicious. Dynamite, I think, to judge
from the few facts I’ve got. The shafts are completely
blocked, as far as we know; and every man underground
is done for.”</p>
<p>“How many does that amount to?”</p>
<p>“There are no figures yet; but it will run into more
than three figures anyway.”</p>
<p>Again the shrill call of the telephone bell sounded. He
took up the receiver.</p>
<p>“Yes?... What’s that? No. 31 and No. 33?... Complete
block? No hope?... Do your best.”</p>
<p>He turned to me.</p>
<p>“Two more gone, before we could get the men up. It’s
a very widespread affair. I told you we hadn’t done with
the Reverend John.”</p>
<p>“What’s he got to do with it?” I asked, astonished.</p>
<p>“Some of his friends carrying out the work he left
unfinished. They mean to smash the Area; and they’ve
hit us on our weakest point, there’s no doubt. No coal,
no work in the factories, no nitrogen. This is serious,
Jack.”</p>
<p>Another call on the telephone brought the news that
three more pits had been destroyed. Nordenholt rang
up the Coal Control once more and urged them to even
greater haste in their efforts to get the men to the surface.
Then he turned back to me.</p>
<p>“Do you realise what it all means, Jack? As far as
I can see, it’s the beginning of the end for us. We can’t
pull through on this basis; and I doubt if we have heard
the full extent of the disaster even now.”</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>I have endeavoured to convey the impression made upon
my mind by the first news of the catastrophe; but little
purpose would be served by continuing the story in detail.
All that morning we stood by the telephone, gathering in
the tale of disaster bit by bit in disjointed fragments as it
came over the wire. Here and there, items of better news
filtered through: reports that in some pits the whole of
the underground workers had been brought safely to the
surface, accounts of the immunity of certain shafts. But
as a whole it was a black record which we gathered in.
The work had been planned with skill; and the execution
had not fallen below the level of the plan. In one or two
cases the miscreants had been detected in the act and
captured before they had time to do any damage; but these
discoveries were very few. As far as most of the pits were
concerned, we never were able to establish how the work
had been done; for all traces were buried under the debris
in the wrecked shafts, which have been left unopened ever
since the catastrophe. One thing was certain, the whole
of the workers actually in the galleries at the time of the
explosions were lost for good and all. They were far
beyond the reach of any human help.</p>
<p>It is no part of my plan to do more than indicate the
horror of this calamity. I draw no pen-pictures of the
crowds around the pit-heads, the crying of the women,
the ever-recurring demands for the names of the lost. These
were features common to all mining accidents in the old
days; and this one differed from the rest only in its
magnitude and not in its form.</p>
<p>Owing to the colossal scale of the casualty list it was
impossible to minimise the matter in any way. Nordenholt
decided to tell the truth in full as soon as the total losses
were definitely established. He gave his newspapers a free
hand; and by the late afternoon the placards were in the
streets.</p>
<p class="center">
<span class="smcap">Terrible Disasters in Coal District.</span><br/>
<br/>
<span class="smcap">Many Shafts Blocked.</span><br/>
<br/>
<span class="smcap">All Underground Workers Entombed.</span><br/>
<br/>
<span class="smcap">11,000 Dead.</span></p>
<p>To most of those who read the accounts of the catastrophe,
it seemed a terrible blow of Fate; but we at the centre of
things knew that the immediate loss was as nothing in
comparison with the ultimate results which it would bring
in its train. All the largest pits were out of action. The
coal output, even at the best, could not possibly keep pace
with the demands of the future; and with the failure of
fuel, the whole activities of the Area must come to a
standstill. Just on the edge of success, it seemed all our
efforts were to be in vain. From beyond the grave the
dead fanatic had struck his blow at the material world
which he hated; and we shuddered under the shock.</p>
<p>Throughout that day I was with Nordenholt. I think
that he felt the need of someone beside him, some audience
which would force him to keep an outwardly unshaken front.
But to me it was a nightmare. The <i>débâcle</i> in itself had
broken my nerve, coming thus without warning; but
Nordenholt’s prevision of the ultimate results which it
would exercise seemed to take away the last ray of hope.</p>
<p>“It’s no use whining, Jack; we’ve just got to take it as
well as we can. First of all, the coal output will cease
entirely for a long time. Not a man will go into even
the ‘safe’ pits after this until everything has been examined
thoroughly; and that will take days and days. It’s no
use blinking that side of it.”</p>
<p>“Why not force them in?” I asked. “Turn out the
Defence Force and drive them to the pits. We <i>must</i> have
coal.”</p>
<p>“No good. I know what they’re thinking now; and
even if you shot half of them the rest wouldn’t go down.
It’s no use thinking of it. I know.”</p>
<p>“Why didn’t the Intelligence Section get wind of it?”</p>
<p>“Don’t blame them; they couldn’t have done more than
they did. Don’t you realise that if a man is prepared to
sacrifice his life—and these fanatics who did the damage
were the first victims themselves—there’s nothing that can
stop him? The Intelligence people had nothing to go on.
The whole of this thing was organised and carried through
by a handful of men, some of whom were evidently employed
in the pits themselves. It was so rapidly planned
and executed that no secret service could have got at it
in time. Remember, we’re making explosives on a big
scale, so that thefts are easy.”</p>
<p>“And if you’re right, what is to happen?”</p>
<p>“Go on as long as we can; then see how we stand;
and after that, if necessary, decimate the population of the
Area so as to bring our numbers down to what we can
feed in future. There’s nothing else for it.”</p>
<p>“I hope it won’t come to that, Nordenholt.”</p>
<p>“It’s no choice of mine; but if it’s forced on me, I’ll
do it. I’m going to see this thing through, Jack, at <i>any</i>
cost now. Millions have been swept out of existence
already by the Famine; and I’m not going to stick at the
loss of a few more hundred thousands so long as we pull
through in the end.”</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>In the main, Nordenholt’s forecast of the attitude which
the miners would adopt proved to be correct. A certain
number of workers, braver or less imaginative than the
rest, returned to work in the “safe” pits in the course
of a day or two; but the main bulk of the labour remained
sullenly aloof. Nothing would induce them to set foot in
the galleries. Work above-ground they would do, wherever
it was necessary to preserve the pits from deterioration;
but they had no intention of descending into the subterranean
world again. Better to starve in the light of day
than run the risk of hungering in some prison in the bowels
of the earth. Neither threats nor cajolings served to move
them from this decision.</p>
<p>Nordenholt, as a last resource, sent exploring parties into
the South to examine the deserted coal-fields of England in
the hope that some of them might be workable; but the
various missions returned with reports that nothing could
be done. During the period since the mining population
had died out, the pits had become unsafe, some by the
infiltration of water, others by the destruction of the
machinery and yet more by the disrepair of the galleries.
Here and there a mine was discovered which could still be
operated; and parties were drafted South to work it; but
in most cases so much labour was required to put the
shafts and galleries in repair that we were unable to look
forward to anything like the previous coal-supply even at
the best.</p>
<p>Meanwhile Nordenholt, day by day, grew more and more
grim. While there was any hope of utilising the mining
population, he clung to it tenaciously; but as time passed
it became clearer that the Area had received its death-blow.
He began to draft his ex-miners into other branches of
industry bit by bit; but with the fall in the coal-supply
there was little use for them there, since very soon all the
activities of the Area would have to cease.</p>
<p>I watched him closely during that period; and I could
see the effect which the strain was producing upon him.
The disaster had struck us just when we seemed to have
reached the turning-point in the Area’s history, at the very
time when all seemed to be sure in front of us. It was a
blow which would have prostrated a weaker man; but
Nordenholt had a tenacity far above the ordinary. He
meant, I know, to carry out his decision to decimate the
Area if necessary; but he held his hand until it was
absolutely certain that all was lost. I think he must have
had at the back of his mind a hope that everything would
come right in the end; though I doubt if his grounds for
that belief were any but the most slender.</p>
<p>For my own part, I went through that period like an
automaton. The suddenness of the catastrophe seemed, in
some way, to have deadened my imagination; and I carried
on my work mechanically without thinking of where it
was all leading us. With this new holocaust looming over
the Area, Elsa seemed further away than ever. If she
had revolted at the story of the South, it seemed to me
that this fresh sacrifice of lives in the Area itself would
deepen her hatred for the men who planned it.</p>
<p>It seemed the very irony of Fate that Nordenholt should
choose this juncture to tell me his views on her feelings.</p>
<p>“Elsa seems to be coming round a little at last, Jack,”
he said to me one day, “I think her emotional side has
worked itself out in the contemplation of the Famine; and
her reason’s getting a chance again.”</p>
<p>“What makes you think that?” I asked. “I haven’t
seen anything to make me hopeful about it.”</p>
<p>“You wouldn’t notice anything. You don’t know her
well enough—Oh, don’t get vexed. Even if you are in
love with her, you’ve only known her for a very short time,
whereas I’ve studied her since she was a child. I know the
symptoms. She’s coming round a little.”</p>
<p>“Much good that will do now! If you decimate the
Area it will be worse than ever. I hate to think of my
own affairs in the middle of this catastrophe; but I simply
can’t help it. If your plan goes through, it’s the end of my
romance.”</p>
<p>He played with the cord of his desk telephone for a
moment before replying. I could see that he had some
doubt as to whether he ought to speak or not. At last
he made up his mind.</p>
<p>“If you’re brooding over things as much as all that,
Jack, I suppose I must say something; but I’m very much
afraid of raising false hopes. You wonder, probably, why
I don’t go straight ahead and weed out the useless mouths
now and be done with it? Well, the fact is I’m staking
it all on the next couple of days. Henley-Davenport seems,
by his way of it, to be just on the edge of something definite
at last. If he pulls it off, then all’s well. If not....”</p>
<p>“What do you mean?”</p>
<p>“If Henley-Davenport gets his results, we won’t need
coal; because we shall have all the energy we require from
his process. I’ve stretched things to the limit in the hope
that he will give us the ace of trumps and not the two. If
he succeeds, we don’t need to weed out the Area; we can
go on as we are; and we shall be absolutely certain to pull
through with every soul alive. But I shouldn’t have told
you this, perhaps; it may be only a false hope and will just
depress you more by the reaction. But you look so miserable
that I thought I had better take the risk.”</p>
<p>“When do you expect to know definitely?”</p>
<p>“He promised me that within two days he would be
able to tell me, one way or the other. Of course, even if
he fails now, he may pull it off later; but I can only wait
two days more before beginning the elimination of all the
useless mouths in the Area. Everything is ready to put
into operation in that direction. But I hope we may not
need these plans. It’s just a chance, Jack; so don’t build
too much on it.”</p>
<p>It was advice easy enough to give; but I found it very
hard to follow. All that day my hopes were rising; things
seemed brighter at last: and it was only now and again
that I stopped to remind myself that the whole thing was
a gamble with colossal stakes. Even Nordenholt himself
was afraid to count too much upon Henley-Davenport,
though I knew that he believed implicitly in his capacity.
But even as I said this to myself I felt my spirits rising.
After the certainty of disaster which had confronted us,
even this hazard was a relief. For the first time in many
weeks I began to build castles in the air once more. I was
half-afraid to do so; but I could not help myself. And as
the hours passed by bringing no news of success or failure, I
think my nerves must have become more and more tense.
A whole day went by without news of any kind.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>The morning of the following day seemed interminable
to me. I knew that within another twenty-four hours
Nordenholt would have given up all hope of Henley-Davenport’s
success and would be setting in motion the
machinery which he had devised for reducing the population
of the Area; and as hour after hour passed without bringing
any news, I became more and more restless. I tried to
work and to ease my mind by concentrating it upon details;
but I soon found that this was useless. Strive as I might,
I could not banish the thought of the tragedy which hung
over us.</p>
<p>At 3.27 p.m.—I know the exact minute, because my
watch was stopped then and I read the time from it afterwards—I
was standing beside my desk, consulting some
papers on a file. Suddenly I heard a high detonation, a
sound so sharp that I can liken it to nothing familiar. The
air seemed full of flying splinters of glass; and simultaneously
I was wrenched from my foothold and flung with
tremendous violence against my desk. Then, it seemed,
a dead silence fell.</p>
<p>I found that my right hand was streaming with blood
from various cuts made by the razor-edges of the broken
glass of the window. More blood was pouring from a gash
on my forehead; but my eyes had escaped injury. When
I moved, I found I suffered acute pain; though no bones
seemed to be broken. The concussion had completely
deafened me; and, as I found afterwards, my left ear-drum
had been perforated, so that even to this day I can hear
nothing on that side.</p>
<p>All about me the office was in confusion. Every pane of
glass had been blown inward from the windows and the
place looked as though a whirlwind had swept through it,
scattering furniture and papers in its track. The shock had
dazed me; and for several minutes I stood gazing stupidly
at the havoc around me. It was, I am sure, at least five
minutes before I grasped what had happened. As soon as
I did so, I made my way, still in intense pain, down the
stairs and into the quadrangle.</p>
<p>The pavements were littered with fragments of broken
glass which had fallen outward in the breaking of the
windows; but there was not so much of this as I had
expected, since most of the panes had been driven inward
by the explosion. Quite a crowd of people were running
out of the building and making in the direction of the new
Chemistry Department in University Avenue. I followed
them, noticing as I passed the Square that all the chimney-pots
of the houses seemed to have been swept off, though
I could see no traces of them on the ground. Later on, I
found that they had been blown down on the further side
of the terrace.</p>
<p>When I came in sight of the Chemistry building I was
amazed, even though I was prepared for a catastrophe.
One whole wing had been reduced to a heap of ruins, a
mere pile of building-stone and joists flung together in utter
confusion. Here and there among the debris, jets of steam
and dust were spouting up; and from time to time came an
eruption of small stones from the wreckage. The remainder
of the edifice still stood almost intact save for its broken
windows and shattered doors.</p>
<p>What astonished me at the time was that the whole
scene recalled a cinema picture—violent motion without
a sound to accompany it. I saw spouts of dust, falling
masses of masonry, people running and gesticulating in the
most excited manner; yet no whisper of sound reached me.
It was only when someone came up and spoke directly to
me that I discovered that I was temporarily stone deaf;
for I could see his lips moving but could hear nothing
whatever.</p>
<p>Like everyone else, I began to remove the debris. I
think that we understood even then that it was hopeless to
think of saving anyone from this wreckage, but we were
all moved to do something which might at least give us the
illusion that we were helping. As I pulled and tugged with
the others, I began to appreciate the enormous power of the
explosive which had been at work. In an ordinary concussion,
iron can be bent out of shape; but here I came across
steel rafters which were cut clean through as though by a
knife. I remember thinking vaguely that the explosive must
have acted, as dynamite does, against the solid materials
around it instead of spending its force upwards; for otherwise
the whole place would have suffered a bombardment
from flying blocks of stone.</p>
<p>For some time I toiled with the others. I saw Nordenholt’s
figure close at hand. Then the sky seemed to take
on a tinge of violet which deepened suddenly. I saw a
black spot before my eyes; and apparently I fainted from
loss of blood.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>Even now, the causes of the Chemistry Department
disaster are unknown. Henley-Davenport and his two
assistants perished instantaneously in the explosion—in fact
Henley-Davenport’s body was never recovered from the
wreckage at all. A third assistant, who had been in the
next room at the time, lived long enough to tell us
the exact stage at which the catastrophe occurred; but
even he could throw no direct light upon its origin.</p>
<p>From Henley-Davenport’s notes, which we found in his
house, it seems clear that his efforts had been directed
towards producing the disintegration of iron; and that on
the morning of the accident he had completed his chain
of radioactive materials which furnished the accelerated
evolution of energy required to break up the iron atoms.
As we know now, he succeeded in his experiment and his
iron yielded the short-period isotopes of chromium, titanium
and calcium until the end-product of the series—argon—was
produced. The four successive alpha-ray changes,
following each other at intervals of a few seconds, liberated
a tremendous store of intra-atomic energy; but,
knowing the extremely minute quantities with which
Henley-Davenport worked, it seems difficult to believe
that the explosion which destroyed his laboratory was produced
by this trace of material. To me it seems much more
probable that his apparatus was shattered at the moment of
the first disintegration of iron and that thus some of the
short-period products were scattered abroad throughout
the room, setting up radioactive change in certain of the
metallic objects which they touched. No other explanation
appears to fit the facts. We shall never learn the
truth of the matter now; but knowing Henley-Davenport’s
care and foresight, I cannot see any other way of accounting
for the violence of the explosion.</p>
<p>Luckily for us, no radioactive gas is produced by the
disintegration of iron; for had there been any such material
among the decay products it is probable that most of those
who had run to the scene of the disaster would have
perished.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>When I recovered consciousness again I found myself
lying on a couch. A doctor was bandaging my hand.
Nordenholt, looking very white and shaken, was sitting in
a chair by the fire. At first I was too weak to do more
than look round me; but after a few minutes I felt better
and was able to speak to Nordenholt.</p>
<p>“What has happened? Did they get Henley-Davenport
out of the wreck?”</p>
<p>“No, there’s no hope of that, Jack. He’s dead; and
the best thing one can say is that he must have been killed
instantaneously. But he’s done the trick for us, if we can
only follow his track. He evidently tapped atomic energy
of some kind or other. Did you notice the sharpness of the
explosion before you were knocked out? There’s never
been anything like it.”</p>
<p>“What’s going to happen now?” I was still unable to
think clearly.</p>
<p>“I’ve sent Mitchell down to Henley-Davenport’s house
to look at his last notes—he kept them there and he
promised me to indicate each day what he proposed to
do next, so that we’d have something to go on if
anything like this happened. Mitchell will ring up as soon
as he has found them.”</p>
<p>I heard afterwards that among the ruins of the laboratory
Nordenholt had been struck by a falling beam and had just
escaped with his life; but his voice gave no hint of it.
I think that his complete concentration upon the main
problem prevented him from realising that he might be
badly hurt.</p>
<p>The telephone bell rang suddenly and Nordenholt went
to the receiver.</p>
<p>“Yes, Mitchell.... You’ve got the notes?...
Good.... You can repeat what he was doing?... No
doubt about it?... All right. Start at once. We must
have it immediately, cost what it may.... Come round
here before you begin; but get going at once. There isn’t
a minute to spare.”</p>
<p>Nordenholt replaced the receiver.</p>
<p>“I thought I could trust Henley-Davenport,” he said.
“He’s left everything in order, notes written up to lunch-time
complete and a full draft of his last experiment, which
will allow Mitchell to carry on.”</p>
<p>A few minutes later, Mitchell himself appeared and gave
us some further details. In his jottings, Henley-Davenport
had suggested some possible modifications of the experiment
which had ended so disastrously; and Mitchell proposed to
try the effect of these alterations in the conditions. Before
he left us, he sat down at Nordenholt’s desk and made a
few notes of the process he intended to try, handing the
paper to Nordenholt when he had finished. I can still
remember his alert expression as he wrote and the almost
finical care with which he flicked the ash from the end of
the cigarette as he rose from the desk. It was the last time
any of us saw him.</p>
<p>“Well, that’s all. I’m off.”</p>
<p>Nordenholt rose stiffly from his chair and shook hands
with Mitchell as he went out. Then he passed to the
telephone and rang up a number.</p>
<p>“Is that you, Kingan? Go across to the South Wing
of the Chemistry place. Mitchell is there. See all that
he does and then clear out before he tries the experiment.
We must keep track of things, come what may.
If he goes down, you will take on after him. Good-bye.”</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>Just after seven o’clock, there was another tremendous
explosion; but this time the concussion seemed less violent
than before. Mitchell himself was not killed outright; but
he suffered injuries which proved fatal within a few days.
Meanwhile the work went on. One after another, the
Chemistry section of Nordenholt’s young men went into
the furnace, some to be killed instantaneously, others to
escape alive, but blasted almost out of recognition by the
forces which they unchained. Yet none of them faltered.
Link by link they built up the chain which was to bring
safety to the Area; and each link represented a life lost or
a body crippled. Day after day the work went on, interrupted
periodically by the rending crash of these fearful
explosions, until at last it seemed almost beyond hope that
the problem would ever be solved. But ten days later
Barclay staggered into Nordenholt’s room, smothered in
bandages, with one arm useless at his side, and gasped out
the news that he had been successful.</p>
<p>Looking back on that moment, I sometimes wonder that
we were not almost hysterical with joy; but as a matter of
fact, none of us said anything at all. Probably we did not
really grasp the thing at the time. I know that I was busy
getting a drink ready for Barclay, who had collapsed as soon
as he gave his news; and all that I remember of Nordenholt
is a picture of him standing looking out of the window with
his back to us. Certainly it wasn’t the kind of scene one
might have imagined.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 class="nobreak"><small>CHAPTER XIX</small><br/>


The Breaking-strain</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">Although</span> Barclay’s work furnished us with the means
of tapping the stores of energy which lie imprisoned within
the atoms of elementary matter, it did not place us immediately
in a position to utilise these immense forces for
practical purposes. To tell the truth, we were in much
the same position as a savage to whom a dynamite cartridge
has been given, ready fitted with a detonator. We could
liberate the energy, but at first we could not bring it under
control.</p>
<p>The next few weeks were spent in planning and building
machine after machine. All the best talent of Nordenholt’s
group of engineers was brought to bear on the problem;
but time after time we had to admit failure. Either the
engines were too fragile for the power which they employed
or there was some radical defect in their construction which
could only be detected on trial. Thus the days passed in a
series of disappointments, until it seemed almost as though
hope of success was fading before our eyes.</p>
<p>During that period, Nordenholt himself grew visibly
older. It was the last lap in his great race against Time;
and I think that this final strain told on him more than
any that had gone before. The mines of the Area were
still empty and silent; no fuel was coming forward to fill
the gaps in our ever-shrinking reserves; and within a very
short period the whole industry of the Area must collapse
for want of coal.</p>
<p>His anxiety was marked by a total change in his habits.
Hitherto, he had sat in his office, directing from afar all the
multitudinous activities of the Area, aloof from direct contact
with details. Now, I noticed, he was continually about the
machine-shops and factories in which the new atomic engines
were being constructed; he had frequent consultations with
his engineers and designers; he seemed to be incapable of
isolating himself from the progress which was very slowly
being made. Possibly he felt that in this last effort he must
utilise all the magnetic power of his personality to stimulate
his craftsmen in their labours.</p>
<p>Whatever his motives may have been, when I think of
him in those last days my memory always calls up a picture
of that lean, dark figure against a background of drawing-office
or engineering-shop. I see him discussing plans with
his inventors, encouraging his workmen, watching the trial
of engine after engine. And after every failure I seem to
see him a little more weary, with a grimmer set in the lines
about his mouth and a heavier stoop in his shoulders, as
though the weight of his responsibilities was crushing him
by degrees as the days went by.</p>
<p>Yet he never outwardly wavered in his belief in success.
He knew—we all knew—that the power was there if we
could but find the means of harnessing it. The uncertainty
had gone; and all that remained was a problem in chemistry
and mechanics. But time was a vital factor to us; and
more than once I myself began to doubt whether we should
succeed in our efforts before it was too late.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>At last came success. One of my most vivid memories of
that time is the scene in Beardmore’s yard when the Milne-Reid
engine was tested for the first time. Nordenholt and
I had motored down from the University to see the trial.
By this time we were both familiar with the general appearance
of atomic engines; but to me, at least, the new machine
was a surprise. Its huge, distorted bulk seemed unlike anything
which I had seen before: the enormous barrel of the
disintegration-chamber overhung the main mass of machinery
and gave it in some way a far-off resemblance to a gigantic
howitzer on its carriage; and this resemblance was heightened
by the absence of flywheels or any of the usual fittings
of an engine. Although I was an engineer, I could make but
little of this complex instrument, designed to utilise a power
greater than any I had ever dreamed of; and I listened
eagerly to the two inventors as they described its salient
characteristics.</p>
<p>Nordenholt, who had seen the plans, seemed to pay little
attention to either Milne or Reid. He was evidently
impatient for results and cared little for the methods by
which they were to be obtained, so long as the machinery did
its work.</p>
<p>The last cables were being attached to the engine as we
stood beside it; for Nordenholt had insisted on a test being
made as soon as the machine was completed. The workmen
screwed up the connections, everyone stood back a little, and
then a switch was pushed home. Immediately the whole
misshapen bulk seemed to be galvanised into violent activity
and with a roar beyond the roof above us the torrent of
escaping helium and argon made its way through the exhaust-pipe.
The needle of the indicator dial jumped suddenly
upward till it registered many thousands of horse-power.</p>
<p>But we had seen all this before and had seen it, too,
followed by a collapse; so that we waited eagerly to learn
how the engine would stand the strain. For an hour we
waited there, while the mechanics poured oil continually into
the tanks to keep the racing bearings from heating; and still
the machine ran smoothly and the thunder of the escape-pipe
roared above us. It was impossible to make oneself heard
amid that clangour; and we exchanged congratulations
scribbled on odd pieces of paper. After an hour, Milne shut
off the disintegrator; and the great engine slowly sank to
rest.</p>
<p>All of us were still deafened by the sound of the exhaust;
and it was by dumb-show and a handshake that Nordenholt
conveyed his thanks to the two designers. I heard a faint
cheer from the workmen.</p>
<p>Nordenholt did not stay long. Within a few minutes, he
and I were back in the motor, on the way home. As we
went, I heard behind us the tremendous blast of the escaping
gases; they had restarted the engine; and to my ears it
sounded sweeter than any symphony, for it meant safety to
us all.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>When we reached the University, I noticed that Nordenholt
stepped from the car with the air of an invalid. He seemed
to have used up all his forces in a last effort; and now he
moved slowly and almost with difficulty. At the Randolph
Stair, he took my arm and leaned heavily on me as we climbed
a step at a time. When we reached the top, he seemed out
of breath. At last we reached his office and he dropped into
his chair at the desk with visible relief.</p>
<p>“It’s my heart, Jack,” he said, after a moment or two.
“It’s been going wrong for months; and I think it’s badly
strained. I knew it was going; and in ordinary circumstances
I would have looked after myself; but it wasn’t worth while,
as things were. I simply couldn’t take things easy. I had
to work on until I saw daylight before me or dropped on the
way.”</p>
<p>He paused, as though pulling his strength together. In
the next room I could hear Elsa’s typewriter clicking.
Nordenholt heard it also; and rose after a few minutes. He
went to the door between the two rooms and spoke to her,
telling her the news of the engine.</p>
<p>“It’s success at last, Elsa. We’re through. Everything’s
safe now.”</p>
<p>I heard her voice in reply; and then he closed the door
and reseated himself at the desk.</p>
<p>“It’s your turn now, Jack. I’ve done my part. I’m
leaving the future in your hands; and I believe you’ll make
good. I wish I could help you; but I’m done, now. I
would only hamper you if I tried to do anything.”</p>
<p>I tried to say something reassuring, but the words faltered
on my lips. The sight of that drawn face was proof enough.
Nordenholt had driven his physical machine as ruthlessly as
he had driven his factory workers; and it was clear that he
had overstrained his bodily powers. His tremendous will had
kept him on his feet until the moment of success; but I
could see now what it had cost him. He had drawn on his
vital capital; and with the accomplishment of his task a revulsion
had set in and the over-tired body was exacting its toll.</p>
<p>As I sat looking at him there, a great feeling of loneliness
swept over me. Here, before me, was the man upon whose
strength I had leaned for the past months, the mind which
had seen so clearly, the will which had held its line so
tenaciously; and now, I felt, Nordenholt was leaning on me
in his turn. It seemed almost an inversion of the course of
Nature; and with the realisation of it, I felt a sense of an
enormous loss. In the next stages of the Area’s history,
there would be no Nordenholt to lean upon: I would have
to stand on my own feet, and I doubted my capacity.
Almost without my recognising it, I had been working always
with Nordenholt in my mind, even in my own department.
I had carried out things boldly because I knew that ever in
reserve behind me were that brain and that will of his which
could see further and drive harder than I could dare; and I
had relied unconsciously upon him to steer me through my
difficulties if they proved too great for my own powers.
And now, by the look on his face and the weariness of his
voice, I knew that I stood alone. I had no right to throw my
burdens on his shoulders any more.</p>
<p>And with a gulp in the throat, I remembered that he trusted
me to go forward. I suppose I ought to have felt some joy
in the knowledge that he had left the reconstruction in my
hands; but any pride I had in this was swallowed up in that
devastating feeling of loss. With the collapse of Nordenholt,
something had gone out of my world, never to return. It left
me in some way maimed; and I felt as though the main source
of my strength had been cut away just when I most needed all
my powers.</p>
<p>“You’ll do your best, Jack? The Area trusted us. Don’t
let them down.”</p>
<p>I tried to tell him I would do my utmost; but I had
difficulty in finding words. I could see that he understood
me, however.</p>
<p>“There’s one thing I’m sorry about—Elsa. She hasn’t
come round yet. But she will, in time. She hates me still,
I know; and it’s a pity, for I need her now, more than I
ever did before. I’m a very sick man, Jack. Luckily, this
breach between us has let her stand on her own feet. She
doesn’t need me so much as she did.”</p>
<p>He fell silent; and for a time we sat without speaking.
When he spoke again, I could see the lines on which his
thoughts had been running.</p>
<p>“If anything happens to me, Jack, you’ll look after Elsa,
won’t you? I’d like to know that she was all right. I know
it’s hard as things are; but you’ll do that for me, even
though it tantalises you?”</p>
<p>I promised; and then I suggested telephoning for a
doctor to look after him.</p>
<p>“Not just now, Jack—I’m tired. I don’t want to be
bothered answering questions. I’m very tired.... And
I’ve finished my work at last. We’ve pulled through. I
can take a rest.... Wake me in a quarter of an hour, will
you? I want a sleep badly.”</p>
<p>He leaned forward in his chair and rested his face on his
arms. In a moment he seemed to fall into slumber. I
thought it was probably the best thing for him at the time;
and I turned to the fire and to my thoughts.</p>
<p>I fell to thinking of all that had happened since first I
met him; and then I cast further back yet to the evening I
had spent at Wotherspoon’s house. How the disaster had
developed step by step, spreading its effects gradually and
with slowly-increasing intensity over wider and ever-wider
areas. If only Wotherspoon had stuck to chemistry and left
bacteriology alone; if only he had chosen some other
organisms than the denitrifying bacteria; if only the fire-ball
had not come that night; if ... if ... if.... All the
Might-have-beens rose before me as I gazed at the flickerings
in the fire. If only Elsa had followed reason and not
emotion ... if only.... And so the maddening train of
thought went on, minute by minute, while in the next room
I could hear the click of her typewriter. Emotion! After
all I could not pretend to scorn it, for what were my own
feelings but emotion too?</p>
<p>The clock in the tower above me struck a quarter.
Nordenholt did not stir and I let him sleep on. It appeared
to me that rest was what he needed most.</p>
<p>It seemed curious how divorced I had become from the
Past. The old life had been swept away utterly and I found
difficulty in recalling much of it to mind. The meeting
with Nordenholt, the founding of the Area, my time with
Elsa, London in its last days, the Reverend John: these were
the things which seemed burned into my memory. All that
had gone before was mirage, faint, unsubstantial, part of
another existence. Even our Fata Morgana was more real
to me than that old life.</p>
<p>And with that I fell back into deeper gloom. I have not
tried to paint myself other than I am. I had never reached
the height of pure endeavour to which Nordenholt had
attained, though sometimes, under his influence, I came near
it. And now, at the recollection of our dream-city, I felt a
keen pang. Why should I attempt to raise that fabric to the
skies, why should I wear myself out in toiling to erect these
halls and palaces through which I must wander alone?
Why, indeed? What was the population of the Area to me,
after all? But even amid my most bitter reflections I knew
that I would do my best. Nordenholt had trusted me.</p>
<p>A fresh chime from the great bell overhead roused me from
my musings. I went across to Nordenholt, not knowing
whether to wake him or not. When I reached his side,
something in his attitude struck me. I touched his hand and
found it cold.</p>
<p>For a moment, I think I failed to recognise what had
happened. Then I shook him gently; and the truth broke
upon my mind. That great engine which had wrought so
hard and so long would never move again. The brain
which had guided the fortunes of the Area up to the last
moment had sunk to its eternal rest.</p>
<p>It was some minutes before I was able to pull myself together
after the discovery. When I got my feelings under
control, I was still badly shaken; for otherwise I would
never have done what I did do. I went straight to the door
and called Elsa. She was sitting at her desk and she looked
up at my voice.</p>
<p>“Well, what is it, Mr. Flint?”</p>
<p>“It’s.... Come here.... It’s Nordenholt; he....”</p>
<p>Before I had completed the sentence she had risen and
passed me. I think she must have seen something in my face
which led her to expect the worst news. She went up to the
desk where Nordenholt was still leaning with his face on his
arms. Like me, she did not immediately grasp what had
happened.</p>
<p>“Uncle Stanley! What’s wrong? Aren’t you well?”</p>
<p>She rested her hand on his shoulder and shook him gently,
just as I had done. In the silence, I heard, far down the
Clyde, the roaring of the atomic engine—the great call
sweeping across the Area and bearing with it the news
of Nordenholt’s final triumph. They were varying the
running of the machine and the waves of sound rose and
fell like the beating of gigantic wings above the city.</p>
<p>Suddenly she turned to me.</p>
<p>“What is it? You don’t mean he’s <i>dead</i>?”</p>
<p>I could only nod in answer; I could not find words.
For an instant she stood, leaning over him, and then she
slipped down beside his chair and put her arms round him.</p>
<p>“Oh, he’s dead. He’s dead. He’ll never speak to me
again!... And I hated him, I hated him.... I made it
hard for him.... And now he can’t tell me if he forgives
me.... Oh, what shall I do, Jack? What shall I do?
Please help me. He was so good to me; and I hurt him
so.... Oh, please help me, Jack. Tell me he forgave
me.... I’ve only got <i>you</i> now....”</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 class="nobreak"><small>CHAPTER XX</small><br/>


Asgard</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">Immediately</span> after the death of Nordenholt, I took over
the control of the Area and instituted the great reorganisation
forced upon us by the new conditions. Almost our last
reserves of coal were used up in the foundries where we built
the new atomic engines; but we succeeded in manufacturing
a number of machines sufficient for our purposes; and
once these were complete, we had no further need of the old-fashioned
fuel. The output of nitrogenous materials sprang
up by leaps and bounds; and the danger of starvation was
over.</p>
<p>All our miners were sent into the neighbouring areas,
where they were put to work in spreading synthetic nitrogenous
manure upon the fields, after Hope’s colloids had
been ploughed into the soil to retain water in the ground.
At last came the harvest, poor in most places, yet sufficient
for our needs. The game was won.</p>
<p>It was after this that we began to send aeroplanes over the
world in search of any other remnants of the human race
which had survived. I was too much occupied with Area
affairs to share in these voyages; but the airmen’s reports
made clear enough the extent of the catastrophe which had
befallen the planet. As I expected, the site of London was
covered with a mere heap of charred and shattered ruins
cumbering it to an extent that prevented us from even thinking
of rebuilding the city in the new age. It was not worth
while clearing away the debris, when other sites were open
to us for our new centres of population. The same fate had
befallen almost all the great cities, not only in Britain but
also across the Continent. Above the ruins of Paris, the
gaunt fabric of the Eiffel Tower still stood as a witness to
men’s achievements in the past; but it was almost alone.
Everything capable of destruction by fire had gone down in
the frenzy of the last days of the old civilisation.</p>
<p>I have already sketched the effects of the Famine upon
the population of the globe. Our explorers found one or
two colonies alive in America; and at a slightly later date
we got in touch with the Japanese Area. Beyond this, the
human race had perished from the face of the earth.</p>
<p>The strangest of all the changes seen by the aerial explorers
must have been in Central Africa and the Amazon
Valley. There, where vegetable life had seemed undisputed
sovereign of vast regions, only a blackened wilderness remained.
Fires had raged over great spaces, leaving ashes
behind them; but in general there was hardly a trace of the
old-time forests and swamps. The Sahara stretched southward
to the Equator; and the Kalahari Desert had extended
up to the Great Lakes—so quickly had the soil of these
regions degenerated into sand. In past ages, man had never
tapped these vast store-houses of forest and veldt; and
Fate decided that they should go down to destruction still
unutilised.</p>
<p>Once the safety-line was passed and we were assured of
food sufficient to maintain our people, other troubles faced
us; and I am not sure that the next ten years was not really
our most dangerous period. Had Nordenholt lived, things
would perhaps have been easier for us; but the difficulties
besetting us were implicit in the nature of things and I
question if he could have exorcised them entirely.</p>
<p>We had, on the one side, a mass of manual labourers
whose intelligence unfitted them for anything beyond bodily
toil; while on the other hand we had supplies of physical
energy from the atomic engines which made the employment
of human labour supererogatory. Yet to leave the
major part of our population entirely idle was to invite
disaster. The development of the atomic engine had at one
blow thrown out of gear the nicely-adjusted social machinery
devised by Nordenholt; and we had to arrange almost
instantly vast alterations in our methods of employment.</p>
<p>It was under the pressure of these conditions that we
became builders of great cities. Nineveh and Thebes were
our first sketches; then came Atlantis, our main power-station
which we built on Islay; after that we erected Lyonnesse
and Tara, fairer than the others, for we learned as we
wrought. Then, as I began to grope toward my masterpiece,
I planned Theleme. And, last of all, the spires and
towers of Asgard grew into the sky.</p>
<p>Once the cities had been planned, we employed a further
contingent of labour in constructing huge roads between
them, gigantic arteries which cut across the country like the
Roman ways in earlier centuries, arrow-straight, but broader
and better engineered than anything before constructed.</p>
<p>Our building materials were new. The introduction of
atomic energy gave us electric furnaces on a scale undreamed
of before; and we were able to produce a glassy and resistant
substance which can be made in any tint. It is of this that
Asgard is constructed; and I believe that no weather conditions
alone will wear it down.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>As I sit here at my desk, I see outstretched before me the
panorama of Asgard, the concrete embodiment of our Fata
Morgana, so far as that vision could be made real in stone.
It is not the City of our dreams, I admit; yet in its beauty
there is a touch of wonder and of mystery that makes it kin
to that builded phantom of our minds. None of our cities
shall ever bear the name of Fata Morgana, which was the
mother of them all. There shall be no profanation of that
castle in the air. Instead we have given to our cities titles
which link their material splendours to the more ancient
glories of myth and tradition; Asgard and Lyonnesse, Tara
and Atlantis, Nineveh, Thebes and Theleme.</p>
<p>Rarely, nowadays, do I feel despondent; but when the
fit comes over me, I open the box in which I still keep the
papers relating to the time when I was planning my garden
cities. I finger my documents and turn over my sketches,
ever amazed at the gulf which lies between my hopes of
that day and our achievements of the present. Here and there,
on the margin of some modest ground-plan, I find scribbled
notes of caution to myself not to expect such vast projects to
be practicable in the near future. And then, after losing
myself in this atmosphere of the past, I go to the great
windows and look down upon Asgard. For once, at least,
in this world, hope has been far outrun by achievement.
Splendours of which I never dreamed have come into being
and lie before my eyes as I gaze. With all this confronting
me, my despondency slips away and I regain sure confidence
in the future.</p>
<p>Cities and gardens have I raised in Dreamland. Other
cities and other gardens I have seen spring from the ground
of this world in answer to my call. But of all these, Asgard
is nearest to my heart; for it is the last which I shall create.
Other men will surpass me; new wonderlands will rise in
the future: but Asgard is my masterpiece and I shall build
no more.</p>
<p>Ten years have gone by since the last stone was laid in
my city; yet every morning as I come to my windows, I
find in it fresh beauties to delight my eyes. Fronting the
sea it stands; and its fore-court is a vast stretch of silver sand
between the horns of the bay. Behind it the ground rises
to a semicircle of low hills set here and there with groves
and fretted with silver waterfalls. Through all the changes
of the year these slopes are green; for snow never drifts
upon them nor do mists gather to hide them from my view.
Only the swift cloud-shadows flitting athwart them bring
fresh lights and shades into the picture as they pass.</p>
<p>Nor do I weary of this greenery. Slowly vegetation is
creeping back upon the face of the world; but still there are
vast deserts where no blade grows: and in my own cities I
planned masses of verdure so that they might be like oases
among the barren spaces of the earth.</p>
<p>Between the hills and the sea, the city stands—a vast
space of woods and fields and gardens from among the greenery
of which rise here and there high halls and palaces of rose-tinted
stone. Here and there amid the green lie broad lakes
to catch the sun; and great tree-shadowed pools, like crystal
mirrors, stand rippleless among the groves. And throughout
the city there is ever the sound of streams and rivulets
falling from the hills and making music for us with their
murmurings as they pass.</p>
<p>Scattered about this pleasance are the dwellings of my
citizens, built of the rose-coloured stone which breaks the
monotony of the verdure; but the houses are sparse, for our
population is small. Asgard is only for the few who can
enjoy its beauties: the many have other cities more suited
to their tastes; and they have no wish to come hither. But
those who dwell with us have full time to fall under its
spell; for Asgard is a city of leisure, though not an idle
one.</p>
<p>When darkness falls on Asgard, great soft beacons shine
out upon the hills, throwing a mellow radiance across the
valley; and down in the woods and along the broad ways
of the city, the silver lamps are lighted, till all Asgard gleams
in outline beside the sea. In the expanses of the parks and
under the shadow of the woods are sprays of coloured orbs
to guide the passer-by; and from hour to hour these change
their tint, so that there is no sameness in them.</p>
<p>Often I come to my windows in the night and gaze out
upon that far-flung tracery of stars across the valley, rivalling
the skies above, as though ten thousand meteors had fallen
from the heavens and still blazed where they lay upon the
earth. And through my open casement come the faint and
perfumed breezes, bringing their subtropical warmth as they
blow across the valley; and I hear, faint and afar, the sounds
of music mingling with the rustling of the trees.</p>
<p>Others may plan; others may build fairer cities in the
sun: but I have given my best; and Asgard almost consoles
me for the loss of that Fata Morgana which I shall never
see.</p>
