<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XV: Document B. 53. X. 15</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Document B.¬Ý53.¬ÝX.¬Ý15</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>I think I have made it clear that when I took over the Reconstruction at Nordenholt‚Äôs request I did so in a disinterested spirit, by which I mean that no personal aims of my own were concerned. I began the work solely in the hope that my plans would ensure the welfare of some millions of people, hardly any of whom I knew as individuals. It is true that I put my whole heart into the task and that I strove with all my might to bring its conclusion within the scope of possibility. I could do no less, in view of the immense responsibility which I had undertaken. Possibly my narrative has minimised the labour which the effort involved; if so, I cannot help it.</p>
			<p>Even my early stages of collaboration with Elsa Huntingtower failed to alter this attitude of my mind. I still saw the problem as one in which great masses of people were involved; and although I appreciated the fact that these masses were composed of individuals each with his or her separate destiny to work out for good or ill, yet it never occurred to me to regard myself as one of them.</p>
			<p>I think that the vision of Fata Morgana, growing ever clearer in my mental vision, forced my thoughts into a fresh channel. In my mind‚Äôs eye I saw that happy city, thronged with its joyous people; and gradually I began to picture myself treading those lawns and wandering amid its gardens. Alone? No, I wanted some kindred spirit, someone who could share the victory with me; and Elsa Huntingtower was the only one who had part and lot in it. She and I had built its dreaming spires together by our common labour; and it was with her that I would stray in fancy through its courts. Of all humanity, we two alone had rightful seizin in its soil.</p>
			<p>It was late before I recognised where all this was leading me; but when at last I awakened, it drove me with tenfold force. I wanted no dim future through which I might rove as a shadow among shadows; they had served their turn in the scheme of things and brought me face to face with reality. If Paradise lay before me, Eve must be there, else it would be a mockery: if I had to face failure, I needed a comforter. I wanted Elsa.</p>
			<p>I mistrust all novelists‚Äô descriptions of the psychology of a man in love. To me, that passion seems an integration of selfishness and selflessness each developed to its highest pitch and so intimately mingled that one cannot tell where the dividing line between them lies. Luckily, analysis of this kind is beyond the scope of my narrative. The affairs of Elsa Huntingtower and me, so far as they concerned ourselves alone, have no place upon my canvas; but since in their reactions they impinged upon a greater engine, I cannot pass them over in silence without omitting a factor which must have had its influence upon events.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>I suppose, from what I see around me, that the average man falls in love by degrees. He seems to be subjected to two forces which alternately act upon him in opposite directions, so that his advance to his goal is intermittent and sometimes slow. In my case, there was nothing of this wavering. Somehow, as soon as I realised what my feelings were, I could not delay an hour longer than was necessary. The real fact was, I suspect, that I did not suddenly fall in love, though I seemed, even to myself, to have done so. In all probability I had been falling in love for weeks without knowing it; and when the illumination came, the long subconscious travail had prepared me for instant action.</p>
			<p>As it happened, it was one of the days on which we usually motored into the country. At two o‚Äôclock I was in the Square with the car; and almost at once the door opened and Elsa appeared. My dreams had far outrun reality; and as the slim fur-clad figure came down the steps I felt my pulse leap. It lasted only for a moment, but I think she read my face like an open book. Behind her came Nordenholt, looking very tired. I could not help seeing the change which the last months had made in him. The deep lines on his face were deeper still; his eyes seemed to be different in some way, though as piercing as ever; and his step had lost the lightness it had when I saw him first in London. He looked me over, as he usually did, but said nothing as he stepped into the back of the car. Elsa took her customary place beside me; and it gave me a novel thrill as I arranged the rug about her. It seemed as though something had fallen from my eyes so that I saw her in a new and wonderful aspect.</p>
			<p>As we drove westward and over the Canal, I noticed that she seemed disinclined to talk; and as I myself was busy with my dreams, I did not try to force the conversation. We had passed Bearsden and were in the open country before she had spoken three sentences; and even these were wilfully commonplace. Reflecting on this, and being myself surcharged with emotion, I was vain enough to guess that she was thinking of me and of what I had to tell her; for I had a curious feeling that she must know what was in my mind. So the milestones swept by, and still the three of us remained silent.</p>
			<p>It was a dreary landscape through which we drove; but all landscapes in those days were bleak and sinister. In the little wood beyond Bearsden, the trees were uprooted and slanting here and there, owing to the new soil giving them no support. Some, which had threatened to fall across the road, had been cut down. Further on, the Kilpatrick Hills loomed over us, dark from the lack of vegetation; while across the Blane valley, once so green, the smooth folds of the Campsies lay black under the wintry sky. Only here and there, where snow covered the ground, did things remind one of the old days.</p>
			<p>Past the Halfway House, along Stockiemuir with its blasted heather under its snow, up the hill at the foot of Finnick Glen the great car ran; and yet none of us spoke a word. Once, after that, Nordenholt gave me a direction; and we turned off toward Loch Lomond.</p>
			<p>When we reached the lochside, beyond Balloch, he made me stop the car.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm going to get out here and walk up towards Luss,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúYou take the car on to the head of the loch and pick me up on the way back. Don‚Äôt hurry. I want some exercise.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The door slammed; and we moved off. I looked back and saw him standing by the waterside; and it struck me that his attitude was that of an old man. He stood with his hands in the pockets of his motor-coat; and his position seemed to exaggerate the stoop of his shoulders. He looked so very, very tired. I realised, all at once, that he was ageing long before his time, worn out by his colossal task. An emotion which was as much dismay as pity swept over me in an instant. Then, as I watched, he pulled himself up and stood erect again, gazing over the water to the desolate islets. The car swung round a corner; and when I looked back once more, he was out of sight.</p>
			<p>But that picture haunted me as I drove up the loch. I guessed at last what this struggle was costing him. Somehow I had never realised it before. I had come to regard Nordenholt as almost akin to the natural forces, the embodiment of some great store of energy which worked upon human destiny calmly and ever certainly. I had looked up to his strength and leaned upon it unconsciously, knowing only that it was there. And now, in that brief vision, I had seen that my support was itself weakening, even though for an instant. There had been a recovery, the old dominating attitude reappeared as he pulled himself together again. But before this I had never seen effort in that attitude; and I saw it now. Even in my exalted condition, the sight of that weary figure struck down into my memory.</p>
			<p>Elsa had not looked back. She sat beside me, her clean-cut profile emerging from her dark furs, gazing straight before her at the road ahead. We ran through Luss without a word to each other. My heart was throbbing with excitement; and yet I hesitated to break the silence. Some miles further up the road, before we reached Tarbet, she asked me to stop the car and suggested that we should go down to the water‚Äôs edge.</p>
			<p>It was there that I at last found speech and, having found it, poured out what I had to say in a torrent of words none of which I can remember now. I had rehearsed that scene many a time in my mind, and yet it all came unexpectedly. I had never anticipated this opportunity. I had thought that some time, when we talked of the future we were planning, I would tell her what I needed to make it complete. And I had thought of how she would take my pleading: I had forecast how she would look and what she would reply. But in none of my visions had I foreseen the reality.</p>
			<p>She listened to me coldly, almost as if her mind were occupied with other things. I grew more passionate, I think, striving to make her understand my emotion; and yet she seemed almost indifferent to what I said. At last I stopped, chilled by this aloofness which I did not understand. In my wildest imaginings I had never thought of this d√©nouement of the situation. I think I must have grown cold myself: for though I can recall nothing of my previous words, the rest of the scene is graven on my mind. For some moments after I had ceased, she remained silent; then at length she spoke, with an accent in her voice which I had never heard before. I remember that she had taken off one glove and stood twisting it in her hands while she talked.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI got you to stop the car here because I have something to ask you, something of tremendous importance to me. Forgive me if I put it first and don‚Äôt answer you immediately. I‚Äôm‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I‚Äôm very grateful for all you have said. But this thing comes before everything; and you must let me ask you about it before we come to‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ to our own affairs.‚Äù</p>
			<p>A pang of apprehension shot through me. What could she be driving at which was of greater importance than our future?</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAs I was going over my papers today,‚Äù she went on, ‚ÄúI came across one which seemed to have been missorted. It didn‚Äôt belong to my section. I glanced at it casually; and then I read it. Have you any idea what it referred to?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt said things I could hardly grasp. Even now I think it must be a mistake. I can‚Äôt believe it was a real document. It must have been a hoax or something like that. And yet, it had the usual serial numbers on it: B.¬Ý53.¬ÝX.¬Ý15.‚Äù</p>
			<p>My throat was dry, but I managed to pull myself together and make a sound like ‚ÄúWell?‚Äù She came close to me and looked me straight in the eyes‚ÅÝ‚Äîso like Nordenholt‚Äôs gaze in some ways‚ÅÝ‚Äîand I tried to bring my features into a mask.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIs it true that everyone outside the Area has been left to die? Is it true that there has been a deliberate plot to starve all the men, all the women, even the little children in the country? Tell me that, and tell me at once. Don‚Äôt wait to wrap it up in fine phrases. Tell me the truth <em>now</em>.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I stood before her, silent.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSo it <em>is</em> true; and you knew it! You acquiesced in it. You even helped in it; I can see it in your face. You cur!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Still I could not find my voice. This was a different scene from that I had thought of only ten short minutes before. It was not that I felt anything myself, except a sort of dull comprehension that my dreams were shattered; but the sight of the pain in her face moved me more than I could express in words. I wanted to help her. I wanted to justify the plan Nordenholt had made. And yet something kept me tongue-tied. I could find no phrase to open my explanations. The outpouring of speech which I had found so easy only a few seconds earlier now seemed dried up. I merely watched her, saying nothing. For a time she struggled with herself, trying to master her feelings. All this time her face had been set; not a tear had come to her eyelashes.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI have a right to know who planned this,‚Äù she continued, after a pause. ‚ÄúDo you know what I thought at first? I suspected Uncle Stanley. I even suspected <em>him</em>. But I don‚Äôt, now. I know him too well. I didn‚Äôt even question him about it. I didn‚Äôt want to worry him until I had found out whether it was true or not. But it <em>is</em> true. Who planned it? Answer me!‚Äù</p>
			<p>There was no concealment possible. Once she had the clue, she would discover everything almost immediately. Not even delay was to be gained by a lie. And with her clear eyes upon me, I could not have lied even had I wished to do so. She might never be mine; but I was hers to do as she wished. For a moment I hesitated, turning over in my mind the idea of referring her to Nordenholt himself; but I abandoned that almost instantaneously. The shock would be greater if it came from him; better let me bear the brunt.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYour uncle planned it. I helped him.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúUncle Stanley! You don‚Äôt expect me to believe that? It shows how little you know of us both if you think.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>Her voice became tinged with doubt, and tears, too, came into it. The evidence was too clear. Only Nordenholt could have carried out such a gigantic scheme. And possibly she read the truth in my face as well. For a moment she seemed frozen, a rigid and silent statue. All the flush had left her cheeks and above the softness of her furs her features seemed as though carved in marble. When she spoke again, she seemed to be trying to convince herself.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDid Uncle Stanley suggest it? I can‚Äôt believe it. It‚Äôs impossible. He couldn‚Äôt do a thing like that. You don‚Äôt know him. He couldn‚Äôt. He couldn‚Äôt. I know he couldn‚Äôt.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Even in that moment of tension, I could not help reflecting how little a woman can know of a man‚Äôs mind. Half our mental processes are shut off from them, as probably half of theirs are closed books to us. The great barrier of sex divides us; and our outlook upon the world can never be the same. This girl had been in close communion with Nordenholt through most of her life; and yet she failed to recognise at once as his handiwork the greatest achievement to which he had put his powers.</p>
			<p>She wavered on her feet. I stepped forward to catch her but she struck aside my hand. Then she seated herself on a bank. I looked away; and when I saw her again she was sitting, her face buried in her hands, while her fragile figure shook with suppressed sobbing.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúElsa,‚Äù I said, ‚Äúyou don‚Äôt understand. It‚Äôs come upon you suddenly; and you‚Äôve been swept off your feet by it. But it was all for the best. It had to be done.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She looked up. On her face, still wet with tears, I saw only contempt and bitterness.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt had to be done?‚Äù she echoed. ‚ÄúDo you mean that forty millions of people <em>had</em> to be robbed of their food and left to starve? Can‚Äôt you see what it means, or are you made of stone? Think of men seeing their mothers dying; think of lovers watching their sweethearts starve; and the children in their mothers‚Äô arms. And you, <em>you</em> say calmly that ‚ÄòIt had to be done.‚Äô You aren‚Äôt a machine. You had the right to choose. And you chose <em>that</em>!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou don‚Äôt understand,‚Äù I repeated wearily. Somehow the strain of the situation seemed to have robbed me of my forces.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, I don‚Äôt understand. How can I, when it means that the men I thought most of in the world turn out to be nothing but murderers on a gigantic scale? I can‚Äôt believe it, even yet. Is it‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ is it all a mistake? Oh! I want to wake up out of this nightmare; I want to wake up. Tell me it‚Äôs a nightmare and not real.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Her voice sounded almost like that of a terrified child in the dark.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs no nightmare,‚Äù I said. ‚ÄúTry to see what it meant. There wasn‚Äôt enough food for us all. Somebody had to die if the rest were to be saved.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd so you elected to be one of the rest? I congratulate you. A most laudable decision, I am sure,‚Äù she said contemptuously. ‚ÄúIt would indeed have been a pity if you had gone short of food in order to save the lives of a mere score of children; tiny, helpless little things that can‚Äôt do more than cry as they starve.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou don‚Äôt understand,‚Äù I repeated. ‚ÄúThere was no chance of saving them in any case. They were doomed from the start. All we did was to ensure that <em>somebody</em> would survive. If the food had been evenly distributed, we should all have died; but your uncle laid his plans to save millions of people. Surely you can see that?‚Äù</p>
			<p>She thought for a moment; and then attacked in a fresh direction.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWho gave you the right to choose among them? You seem to think you are a demigod with the power of life and death in your hands. How could <em>you</em> take the responsibility of the choice? And how could you bear to save yourself when you knew other men, and perhaps better men, had to die? I can‚Äôt understand you. You‚Äôre so different from what I thought you were. Somehow all my ideals seem to be breaking. You and Uncle Stanley were the two finest men I had met. I never dreamed for a moment that you would turn out to have feet of clay. And now.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>I tried hard to put our case before her. I explained the state of things at the outbreak of the Famine. I gave her figures to prove that Nordenholt had only worked to save what he could from the disaster. It was all of no avail. I think that the picture of the starving children filled her mind to the exclusion of almost everything else; and that she hardly listened to what I said. Once she whispered to herself, ‚ÄúPoor little mites,‚Äù just when I thought I had caught her attention at last. I gave it up in the end. She looked away across the loch, where the first stars were lighting up behind the hills; and we stood in silence, so close in space, so remote from each other in our thoughts. At last she spoke again.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúStill I don‚Äôt understand it all. I see your view; but I can‚Äôt share it. It seems so cold-blooded, so horrible. But I can‚Äôt understand you, just when I thought I knew you through and through. Tell me, how could you talk of Fata Morgana and all our dreams when you <em>knew</em> that this terrible thing was happening? That‚Äôs what I don‚Äôt grasp.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI can‚Äôt explain it to you. Probably I keep my mind in compartments. But never mind about me, Elsa; I‚Äôm done for now. I don‚Äôt matter. But you mustn‚Äôt condemn your uncle along with me. He never led you on to dream dreams, so you haven‚Äôt that against him. I want you to believe me that he has been a saviour and not a destroyer, as you seem to think. Don‚Äôt lose your faith in him until you understand. Don‚Äôt prejudge things till you know everything. Speak to him yourself before you come to a conclusion. He depends on you, more than you think, perhaps. And he‚Äôs worked himself to the bone to save those few millions that are left to us. Don‚Äôt judge him till you know everything.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She looked at me more kindly than she had done since the beginning.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs just what I should have expected from what I knew of you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝFlint. You think of him first and don‚Äôt bother about yourself. You aren‚Äôt selfish. I can‚Äôt understand you, somehow. You seem such a mixture; and until today I had no idea you were a mixture at all. It‚Äôs all so difficult.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She ended with a choke in her voice and turned towards the car. I followed her and switched on the headlights, ready to start. She climbed into her seat; and I put the rug around her knees. Just as I was on the point of starting, she spoke again.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou‚Äôve told me all I need to know; but I must hear it from Uncle Stanley himself. I‚Äôll go on being his secretary. I‚Äôll do all I can to help. But I hate you both. Yes, if this is true, I hate him too. What else do you expect? You look on yourselves as saviours, it seems. You may be that, but you certainly are murderers. You can‚Äôt even see why I abhor you both. That shows you the gulf between us. Oh, I hate you, I hate you, with this cold calculation of yours: so much food, so many lives. Is that the way to handle human destinies? Drive on.‚Äù</p>
			<p>A little further down the road, she spoke again in a quivering voice which she strove to keep level and cold:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThis ends any work together. I couldn‚Äôt bear it in your case. With Uncle Stanley it‚Äôs different. I will go back to my old place with him. But I never want to see <em>you</em> again, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝFlint. I‚Äôve lost two illusions today; and I don‚Äôt wish to be reminded of them more than I need be. I promised him that I would always help him; and I‚Äôm going to keep my promise, cost what it may. But I never promised <em>you</em> anything.‚Äù</p>
			<p>For a few minutes I drove on in silence. The whole world seemed to have fallen around me. All that I had longed for, all my future, seemed to have collapsed in that short afternoon. I was not angry; I don‚Äôt think I was even completely conscious of what it all meant. I felt stunned by an unexpected blow. At last I roused myself.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúElsa,‚Äù I said, ‚Äúdo you remember the first evening we met?‚Äù</p>
			<p>She never moved.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou sang that dirge from <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Cymbeline</i>, you remember? When you‚Äôre calmer, I want you to think over it. I don‚Äôt want you to have any regrets. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝNordenholt can‚Äôt last forever under this strain. Think carefully.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She made no sign that she had heard me speak. The car whirred through the dusk, while we sat silent and aloof from each other. It was a return very different from that which I had hoped for when I set out. I was almost glad when, further down the loch, the beams of the headlights showed us the figure of Nordenholt in the road. I pulled up the car beside him; and Elsa leaned forward in her seat.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúUncle Stanley, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝFlint has told me everything. I saw a document this morning, B.¬Ý53.¬ÝX.¬Ý15; and I forced <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝFlint to explain what it meant. Did you really plan this awful thing?‚Äù</p>
			<p>I could not see Nordenholt‚Äôs face in the shadow; but his voice was as steady as ever in his reply. Afterwards I realised that he must have foreseen such a situation as this long before.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt is perfectly true, Elsa. Anything that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝFlint has told you is probably correct, though his connection with the matter is very slight.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut he says that you planned it all and that he helped you. I can‚Äôt‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I can‚Äôt quite understand it all. It‚Äôs a mistake, isn‚Äôt it? It‚Äôs not your real plan, surely. You‚Äôre going to save all these people in the South, aren‚Äôt you?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúEvery soul that can be saved by me will be saved, Elsa. You can count on that.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut you will give them all a chance of life, won‚Äôt you? You won‚Äôt take away all the food from them?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere‚Äôs no food to spare.‚Äù</p>
			<p>For a few moments there was silence. Elsa made a sudden movement, and I guessed that she had recoiled from Nordenholt‚Äôs touch. At last she spoke again, in a way I had not anticipated.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo you remember my three wishes, Uncle Stanley? You gave me two of them and now I want the third. You promised me the whole three; and you never broke your word yet. I want you to save these people in the South. That‚Äôs my third wish.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I think it was that which made me realise the gulf that yawned between us, more than anything that had gone before. How could she imagine that Nordenholt‚Äôs vast machine could be deflected on account of some childish promise? And yet her voice had taken on a new tone of confidence; everything, she thought, was going to be set right. It seems she must have believed, even then, that the treatment of the South was only one of a number of alternative schemes; and that she could force the adoption of some other, not so good, perhaps, but still possible, as a solution. Her very belief in Nordenholt‚Äôs powers led her to assume that he must have several plans ready pigeonholed, and that the rejection of one merely entailed the substitution of some other which was already cut and dried.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhen that promise was made, Elsa, there was one condition: your wish was not to be an impossible one. This <em>is</em> impossible.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh!‚Äù There was such an agony in her voice that I felt it rasp my already over-tried nerves.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat is final, Elsa. There is nothing more to be said.‚Äù</p>
			<p>For almost a minute she made no reply. In the silence I could feel her struggling for control of her voice. When at last she spoke, she seemed to have fought down her emotion, for her tone was almost indifferent:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúVery well, Uncle Stanley. You refuse to help these people; but I am not so easy in my mind. I will go into the South myself and do my best to help them; and if I cannot help, I can at least take the same risks as they do. <em>I</em> can‚Äôt stay here, well fed and well cared for when they are suffering.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou will not do that, Elsa. No, I don‚Äôt mean to prevent you going if you wish, though you have no idea what you would be going to. But I haven‚Äôt brought you up to be a shirker; and you‚Äôre needed here. You have the whole of your work at your finger-ends and if you go it will dislocate that department temporarily; and we can‚Äôt afford to have even a temporary upset at this stage. You promised you would stay, no matter what happened; and I ask you to keep your promise now. I also tell you that I need you, and your work here is helping to save lives in the Area, more lives than you could ever save outside. Now do you wish to go?‚Äù</p>
			<p>She thought for a time, evidently weighing one thing and another. While she was still silent, I broke in, wisely or unwisely I did not know.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf Elsa goes into the South, Nordenholt, I go with her to look after her. You must find someone else to take my place. I can‚Äôt let her go alone.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Nordenholt‚Äôs voice was as calm as ever.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou understand, Elsa? If you go, you take away <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝFlint; and although I can replace you in your department, I doubt if I can get anyone as good as he is in his line. Go South and you cripple one of the essential parts of the Area. Stay here, and you help us all towards safety‚ÅÝ‚Äîand we are not near the safety-line yet. Which is it to be? I put no pressure on you. I only point out what I think is your duty.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I had expected some angry reply, some hurried decision which might bring disaster in its train; but luckily things took a different turn. I believe that the strain had been too great for her. Now came the collapse; and before I knew what had happened, she had broken into tears. Nordenholt leaned over her, trying to comfort her; but it was useless; and he let her work out her fit of emotion to the end. At last she pulled herself together.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf you are sure you need me, I will stay. But I hate you both. I hate the work. I hate the Area and everything in it. I‚Äôll keep my promise to you; but things will never be the same again.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ And, oh, this morning I was so happy.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Nordenholt climbed aboard the car without another word, and I drove on into the dark. Now and again I heard a half-suppressed sob from the girl at my side; but that was all. At the door of Nordenholt‚Äôs house I stopped. Elsa left me without uttering even ‚ÄúGood night.‚Äù I watched her tall, slim figure go up the steps and disappear; and something blinded me. I found Nordenholt standing at the side of the car.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPoor chap,‚Äù he said, with an immense pity in his voice. ‚ÄúSo you‚Äôre involved too? I wish it had been otherwise. Well, well; I couldn‚Äôt hope to keep it from her much longer at the best. But I‚Äôm very, very sorry. She‚Äôll take it so hard. Her type never looks at these things the way we do.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He paused and looked at me keenly in the light of the terrace lamps. When he spoke once more, his voice sounded very weary.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúStand by me, Jack. Get your part ready in time. Don‚Äôt flinch because of this. I‚Äôm nearly at the end of my tether.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I could not trust myself to speak. We shook hands in silence, and he went up the steps into the house.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
